# February 4, 2026

Meeting link: [https://meet.google.com/vxz-xwzs-umv](https://meet.google.com/vxz-xwzs-umv)

Agenda:

* Bazel bot [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-ai-assisted-bazel-fixer-bot/89178](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-ai-assisted-bazel-fixer-bot/89178)
* Maintainers list refresh update from Aaron
  * Completed: libc, libcxx, lldb, flang, polly
  * Almost completed: clang, clang-tools-extra
  * Unknown: llvm, it’s a work in progress
  * Need to be done (high priority): lld, compiler-rt, mlir, libunwind
  * Need to be done (low priority): bolt, offload, third-party, utils
  * Don’t need maintainers list: cmake, cross-project-tests, llvm-libgcc, runtimes
  * Now have lead maintainers: libclc, libcxxabi, libsycl, openmp, orc-rt
* [RFC: Require Pull Requests for all llvm-project commits](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164)
  * [git-llvm-push](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/26b1f61c14768b8104c998ab2579391e5cc766ed/llvm/utils/git-llvm-push) script is available and appears to be used by at least some contributors
  * We updated the git-llvm-push script and auto-subscriber to reduce the amount of noise based on the feedback on the RFC
  * We now have a [workflow](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/178769) to prune unused branches
  * What's next for the RFC?
    * [Can we enable the “Require a pull request before merging” ruleset but give everyone the ability to bypass this rule for now?](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164/68)
    * Can we set a date/criteria for removing the bypass option?

Notes:

- Bazel bot discussion
- Aaron is getting a lot of feedback with frustration about the AI-generated stuff, with maintainers saying “I don’t bother to look at reviews anymore”. So we may tighten the AI policy, up to saying no AI at all, and it would be a shame if we had to remove the bazel bot.
- Aiden (author of the RFC): people maintaining the bazel build are in consensus that this is a reasonable thing to do, so I’m not too concerned about bandwidth there. In terms of AI policy, if it eventually changes, we will end up complying with that. The infrastructure is already set up, it’s a only a question of us creating PRs or not. I’d be a bit disappointed if all this work ends up for nothing, but we can live with that.
- Vlad: I objected to the initial proposal with AI-opened PR that humans will look at. Now it looks like humans are going to create the PR. Has the RFC changed in the meantime.
- Aiden: this was discussed on the RFC; having human create a PR doesn’t seem to address the concerns raised. I’d push for a bot creating it so it is obvious it is auto-generated.
- Alex: also in discussions with maintainers about the amount and value of changes. A lot of the changes we see are borderline extractive (not worth litigating). From what I understand is Bazel bot is that most people don’t care, and the people who do care are happy to have that. So it sounds like it wouldn’t be a problem from the intent of the policy (not extractive contributions).
- Aaron: does bazel have to be in-tree? Can it be in a separate repo given it’s a peripheral component?
- Aiden: the original intention of the RFC was that it only touches a small sub-community where there is consensus. As to Aaron’s point, it originally existed out of tree, and there was a long discussion. The main motivation is that a lot of companies and contributors benefit from it being in the monorepo, and there is also the versioning problem.
- Aaron: I figured it was too easy to get out of sync. That wasn’t a threat to remove bazel by the way. As far as I can tell, the RFC follows the policy, and the concerns are more to do with the AI policy. Based on that, I don’t see a reason not proceed with it. Especially since the proposer takes a stance that they will remove if it starts being against the policy.
- Aaron: is anybody in opposition?
- \<silence\>
- Aaron: then we consider it accepted.
- Peter: there is a precedent for GNBuild, with automated commits, it is not AI based. If the maintainer of that decides to replace that bot with an AI version. Does this decision set precedent?
- Nikita: GNBuild currently commits to main, so that would be a no-go, we will have to discuss again.
- Alex: same comment.
- Aaron: I’m not super-excited about this being precedent-setting as people can go all-in. Each situation is unique and we should keep that in mind.
- Vlad: if Google can put together a bot that opens pull requests, why are we asking people to review that?
- Alex: it is consistent with the policy, it’s if it’s AI and extractive that we’d say not interested. Here we have a bunch of reviewers who are willing to maintain the output (and are on call to handle fires).
-

- Aaron has been working through the maintainers list (see above for the status). Got good feedback from lead maintainers who felt disempowered to clean up the lists themselves.
- Nikita: I have been looking at llvm, but I just try to assess whether the maintainers are active.
- Aaron: I have been emailing maintainers at least to check if the address is correct, which was not the case for some of them. Otherwise, I have been creating github issues and assigning to them. A couple of people volunteered to step down or decided to do more reviews. It has been super labor-intensive. This was a good experience overall and I intend to keep doing it. We do have some high-priority ones: lld, compiler-rt and mlir are in an odd situation where they have no lead maintainers. Libunwind has no maintainers, I will start going through the commit list to find maintainers for it.
- Nikita: is libunwind maintained by libc++?
- Aaron: it’s a separate entry in the monorepo. But the three others are challenging.
- Nikita: lld has a pretty obvious lead maintainer, doesn’t it?
- Petr: context on libunwind, they are used together with libc++, but there is a tricky relationship. We may need to do a call for maintainers. lld and compiler-rt are also tricky. lld is four linkers in a trench coat, which are totally separate projects that don’t share infrastructure. Fangrui does maintain the ELF backend, but not a good fit for other backends. I don’t know if someone qualifies and is willing to take up the role. Compiler-rt is similar, if not worse, it’s a bunch of different runtime libraries. They just go into the same installation. There have been discussions in the past about work.
- breaking up compiler-rt into multiple projects, with some support, but nobody willing to put in the Aaron: it makes it easier to find a lead maintainer because they basically serve as redirection to other maintainers and need no particular expertise. We just need a person who is willing to step up.
- Alex: can we just guarantee that there is a maintainer for everything, e.g., top-level directory or next-level directory.
- Nikita: we don’t necessarily need a lead maintainer for each subproject. Compiler-rt is a bit more interesting. The unifying part of that is the build system, then the lead maintainer is the build system maintainer.
- Petr: do we even specify what is a top-level project? There are subdirectories that are not projects.
- Aaron: for some of these, just having a dispatcher may be helpful, in particular for uds.
- Alex: should we just name it differently?
- Aaron: coordinator?
- Vlad: point-of-contact?
- Aaron: should we try finding maintainers for `third_party`? A good example of that was a new pedantic diagnostic that broke Google’s benchmarks.
- Petr: having someone would be nice. The other one would be the build system. Maybe we should have a top-level maintainer for the build system. There’s a precedent with flang reorganization.
- Alex: maybe we should have the top-level cmake directory have a lead maintainer and then other projects inherit them.
- Petr: that’s the reason why we have a common third-party.
- Aaron: if it’s important enough to be in the monorepo, we should have somebody doing the housekeeping for them.
- Petr: the policy we have at google is to have an “owner” for each third-party dependency, and if there’s none, it’s deleted.
- Aaron: even if it is brutal, I think it is okay to try getting rid of unmaintained components or third-party. We don’t want to get too far though.

- Mandatory PR discussion
- Enable the ruleset and grant exception.
- Petr: I’d like to have a thumbs up on this.
- Nikita: granted.
- Alex: \+ 1\.
- Aaron: I don’t see any opposition to that.
- Aaron needs to drop as we are over time.

- Petr: we’ve made changes to address feedback. It wasn’t clear to me what were the criteria before we can consider it again.
- Nikita: you did everything that was asked from you, thanks for creating the script.
- Nikita: should we fix the gnbot being able to push to main? Overall, I’m not super favorable of this RFC but not anymore opposed.
- Petr: can we come up with a date by which the exception will be removed? If there are major blockers, we can push it back. But otherwise we could take silence as agreement.
- Nikita: looking through the commit log, almost everything is a PR. Should we do a one day trial?
- Petr: didn’t really think about it, but it’s something to consider.
- Alex: how about the following conclusion: the migration process should go forward and Petr will describe the specific process of how the exception will be removed: dates, experimentation stages, how to account for concerns.

Action item:

- Aaron: post conclusion on the bazel bot discussion. Be clear that this is not a precedent-setting decision.
- Alex: figure out the name for the lead maintainer alternative role and propose policy wording.
- Aaron: identifying places where we don’t have maintainers and we should; come up with a list of places where we need maintainers to be found, for clang and top level (filling it with people is a separate task).
- Alex: post conclusion on the mandatory RFC discussion.

# January 7, 2026

Meeting link: [meet.google.com/bxs-cpcy-fdv](http://meet.google.com/bxs-cpcy-fdv)

- Elections
- What is the scope of the community area team? Should it include moderators? CoC members?
- Lack of Project Council representation from (sub)projects that do not have an area team (Project Council is selected from area teams)
- Policy updates about maintainers
- AI policy [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-llvm-ai-tool-policy-human-in-the-loop/89159](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-llvm-ai-tool-policy-human-in-the-loop/89159)

Notes:

- Aaron: Redhat may be able to run the election on the same system, likely nothing else is needed beyond our input on the area teams to be re-conducted or created.
- We as the project council should tell the community that the nominations are open.
- Aaron: Dates are in line with what we did last year, we don’t know of any complaints about these specific dates.
- Reid: we originally targeted these dates so that people are back from vacation. But there were some people who weren’t aware that this was happening. We can do better job with announcements.
- Aaron: having consistent dates helps with that, “it’s the election season”.
- Renato: maybe some people may miss it now, but we can’t do much better than this. Any feedback on the voting system.
- Aaron: no negative feedback that I know of.
- Renato: I only heard good things.
- Aaron: did anybody hear bad things?
- \<silence\>
- Decided the dates should be:
  - January 12, 2025 \- Area Team nominations begin
  - January 26, 2025 \- Voting opens
  - February 9, 2025 \- Voting closes
  - February 10, 2025 \- Results announced on Discourse
- Alex: elaborating on the representation, did folks from lld vote for anybody?
- Aaron: community area team is for something that affects the whole area team, like the code of conduct.
- Nikita: so effectively the community team would subsume topics that are currently escalated to the project council.
- Aaron: yes.
- Chris: crafting the scope was tricky when we wrote the documents. We envisioned something like the code of conduct, moderation policy (we don’t really have one), moving off of mailing lists/IRC. Looking how does the community operate / make decisions and continue to exist in a healthy way.
- Renato: there’s overlap, it’s a better place to put the community stuff. I’m sometimes asked to mediate in some technical disagreement. If there was a community team, I could work with them to help me on this. It would be better to have a group of people who are better than me at that.
- Aaron: I don’t think we can move the CoC committee under the team because it needs a legal shield of the Foundation.
- Renato: there is a softer approach than doing full CoC.
- Nikita: my high-level concern is we have multiple teams responsible for whole-project concerns: infra, community and the project council. There may be a problem if many bodies are responsible for the same concerns. From what I hear, it’s more of the communication team: discourse, discord, moderation.
- Aaron: that’s a good observation, I was thinking about svn to git.
- Nikita: I’d draw the line where git belongs to infra and mailing lists belongs to communication.
- Aaron: it seems reasonable to me to have both
- Nikita: then who makes the decision?
- Alex: I was going to ask about the role of the Project Council? Then it can arbitrate between the team.
- Alex: now with the communications team, I was thinking that policy questions should go to the Project Council.
- Reid: what about the community area team drafting policy proposals and project council vetting those somehow? This is similar to how we have the CoC and the committee that interprets. Maybe we tweak the names to moderation team.
- Petr: it’s equivalent to Rust moderation team (Chris B also says in the chat).
- Alex: Reid’s point starts to look like separation of power between legislative, executive and judicial.
- Aaron: this keeps the question open, especially about communication, who decides to do the change if we have a moderation team? I don’t know if a communication team makes sense given that we don’t change these too often.
- Reid: iterating on the policy-writing group, I did a pass editing a developer policy, and the infra team put out a PR policy. Do we think that the community team should be responsible for updating the developer policy? This is not communication. Is this the responsibility of the infra team or community team? Moderation may not be the right name then.
- Petr: is it even responsibility of the area team? Everybody should be able to send these proposal.
- Renato: it’s not the people who come up with idea, but supposed to see something missing in the document, e.g., auto-merge. The policy group can then pick it.
- Aaron: I don’t think the goal for the project council was to be making and implementing policy.
- Reid: I was going to respond to Renato’s point on who proposes changes. Something we’ve observed, when you give people a formal role, they start doing things and behaving more like a leader. Many major changes were proposed by area team leads. I don’t want to change the open nature of the LLVM, but area team leads are people with the biggest stake in how the project leads. It seems reasonable to say the responsibility is looking for gaps.
- Aaron: we probably don’t have the scope. I don’t want us to rush.
- Reid: we’ve made some progress, but not really ready yet and it’s too short.
- Petr: I would be also interested in what other projects are doing. Is there something we can learn from them?

- Alex: moving to the representation. lld discussion felt a bit odd.
- Aaron: it should be the responsibility of the project council to ensure representation.
- Petr: the area teams are also responsible for the maintainers list. Some people at Google assumed it felt under the LLVM area team, some others that it falls under Project Council. But there are other things, like runtimes, libc++, etc.
- Nikita: my understanding that everything that falls through the cracks go the the Project Council. The issue is that the Project Council is not directly elected. So somebody who works on, e.g., lld, can only elect through some other area team. Maybe for the next time, we can have direct election.
- Renato: not every project needs an area team. We have maintainers who were doing the role of area team before. My understanding is that we have need more people on the “soft” problems that maintainers can’t handle.
- **Aaron: I’ll take an action item going through maintainer lists and poke people to make it up to date.**
- Alex: not suggesting to change right now, but maybe we can have a direct election for one seat at the project council.
- Renato: can we make an area team for the lead maintainers of projects that don’t have an area team?

- Alex: we have subprojects with no lead maintainers, maybe we can just ensure coverage?
- Nikita: there’s a lot of stuff that wouldn’t be covered.

- Chris: we need someone to run the election. We need proctors who are not running in the election. I’m happy to do that since I’m not running, but it is probably better to have more than one person. Last time, I was on a zoom call with people and recorded it. We need at least one other person.
- Alex: can we livestream it?
- Chris: I will try soliciting Mike Edwards who’s on the foundation board, who is not running, so there is at least a second person. Otherwise I’ll come back with an alternate suggestion.
- Chris: Tanya suggested that we create email lists for area teams. We can also have an elections mailing list, so nominations go there.
- No objections

- Nikita: I think the policy Reid proposed has broad support in the thread.
- Aaron: I have not had time to read the thread, so I’d like a day to verify. But before my break, it looked like going towards a consensus.
- Alex: there’s one person arguing against the policy saying it would preclude non-expert contributors.
- Nikita: i’ll point out this is not an established contributor.
- Renato: agreed
- Chris: this is a person who attacked multiple OSS projects, they are responsible for MESA AI policy, they also tried to weaponize the CoC.
- Reid: it is sort of the point of excluding non-compiler experts or at least aspiring experts from contributing.
- Petr: I’m supportive of the policy.
- **Action item: Alex to draft a resolution doc.**

- Alex: do we hold another meeting in February, just before the election results are announced?
- **Decision: hold a meeting on Feb 4, same time slot.**

- Caroline: it’s difficult to find information about governance from [llvm.org](http://llvm.org)
- **Petr: it was an action item for me.**

# December 10, 2025:

Meeting link: [meet.google.com/kqk-mhsj-eqt](http://meet.google.com/kqk-mhsj-eqt)

- Voting for decisions on
  - SFrame discussion
  - Mandatory PR discussion

Notes:

- Sframe discussion
- Aaron: there were non-linker bits and linker bits to the proposal, nobody seems to be opposed to the non-linker bits. Fangrui identified some technical concerns with Sframe as a design, but those were communicated to the appropriate body controlling the ELF spec. Other tools have already invested into this. The question is whether the PR is deeply technically flawed, which I’m not qualified to judge. I may be biased because of the WG21 for clang taking years to revise things. So maybe there is a weak consensus on having it under a flag.
- Alex: two discussions, one technical mostly on the merits of sframe (partly on cost of having it in the binary) and a discussion of maintainership and who gets to decide. I don’t see consensus on either of those. On one side, we have a very detailed argument on the design of sframe; the proposers didn’t seem to address things like binary cost, which probably should be addressed. As for maintainers, Sterling can volunteer to step up as a maintainer. That could be a way to solve the maintenance costs. More people concerned than just Fangrui. But LLVM is not the place to say “this is a good spec” vs bad spec; we can provide feedback. But we shouldn’t be opposed just because we think the spec is bad unless there’s a strong reason to.
- Petr: I agree to an extent that we are not in the position to decide whether the spec is good or not. C++ is a great example where we don’t really discuss that, but there is an official standard body. Sframe is merely a community agreeing on it. If we look at C or C++ extensions where LLVM/Clang decided not to implement them, e.g., the nested functions GCC extension. Is Sframe in the same category?
- Vlad Serebrenikov: re c++, if we see major problems with a C++ spec, we don’t accept the PR until the serious defect in the spec is resolved.
- Aaron: in clang, if it’s in the standard, we try our best to implement it; if we see a problem, we go back to the committee; if they don’t agree to fix it, we sometimes ignore the spec as the last resort.
- Petr: I also read the discussion on LKML and Fangrui’s blog post. The biggest issues are it being non-compact and non-concatenable, no linker-gc. Some of these may be fixable. After reading the LKML discussion, it was pointed out that these are intentional consequences of the design rather than deficiencies. Sframe was meant to be “simple” frame format, not “short”, so it was not expected to be compact. There is now exploration into other formats for stack unwinding. It’s a large design space where it is okay to have different points: the most compact format that is difficult to use that may co-exist with a less compact but easier format. In LLVM, there are things like dsym/gsym that occupy different design points. Just because Sframe is in a certain design point, we shouldn’t reject it because we don’t like that point. I don’t see a problem with having Sframe and some future format. The open question is around evolution, the v2 and v3 discussion, this is a technical discussion to be figured out by the maintainers, not necessarily a topic for the project council.
- Nikita: I liked the analogy with the GNU extensions for the C++ compiler, this is the same but at the ELF level. This comes down to how many people are looking to adopt it at this point of time. Fangrui makes a good case for why SFrame is not a good choice for userspace, but people are still willing to pay, e.g., 5% size increase for that feature. If there is sufficient buy-in or interest to use this format in its current form, we should not block its inclusion.
- Aaron: I thought this was behind a flag.
- Nikita: Yes, with a caveat that it may be enabled on the distribution level.
- Petr: This is similar to frame pointers, you have an option to turn them on or off at distribution level. This comes with tradeoffs.
- Aaron: the conclusion seems to be “we don’t have a strong reason not to have it”, though there is no strong support.
- Alex: did we identify weak consensus or are we overriding the discussion?
- Aaron: I think there is a majority in favor.
- Nikita: Indu Bhagat in the call who worked on the GNU side of this.
- Indu: there are multiple concerns Fangrui raised. One of them is to design stack tracing and stack unwinding format simultaneously. These have different requirements, especially with a compact representation. Reconciling this is fundamentally impossible. The timeline for v3: there is a proposal open for testing, unless no serious problems are found, it may be expected in the next binutils release around January. Size on Aarch64 can be addressed. Sframe is not meant for stack unwinding, this is a big problem for the GNU/Linux community between kernel and userspace, it was hard to solve that individually.
- Nikita: should we just wait for v3 then?
- Indu: it’s up to the LLVM community… As for GNU, we will drop support for generating v2 but will support reading it.
- Nikita: the non-concatenability issue is not something that can be resolved?
- Indu: this is not the only format that cannot be concatenated. Every time you have a format with index, it cannot be.
- Petr: we may be conditioned on users adopting Sframe, do we know are there any major Linux distributions shipping it? Maybe Sterling
- Sterling: just now, somebody posted “we are interested on Gentoo to explore v2, maybe Fedora as well”
- Petr: the question was more if somebody is already shipped that.
- Indu: we coordinated with the distros to hold back on having v2 binaries at distro level.
- Sterling: I would be much easier to experiment if it was in tree. I am happy to put it behind some “do-not-use” flag.
- Vlad: I would be very unfortunate if Fangrui quit maintaining lld over this.
- Alex: we could ask for Sterling to step up as the maintainer and put everything behind a flag. That may be a broader consensus.
- Aaron: so we are making a recommendation and asking if there are serious concerns about that?
- Indu: I’d suggest getting v2 in because it helps weeding out bugs together.
- Aaron: are we asking for maintainership? experimental flag? asking v2 or suggesting the community to decide? Whatever we can do for the community to be comfortable.
- Nikita:
- Alex: we don’t have objections to this being in-tree provided there is a dedicated maintainer. Given that, let folks iron out specifics of flags and versions in the PR rather than determine technical decisions here.
- **Action Item: Alex to make a draft and send around to project council**

- Mandatory PR discussion
- Nikita: we should defer that (again) because the tooling is not yet implemented.
- Alex: from reading the thread, I see consensus. Many people are in favor, there are some concerns. There are detailed posts trying to address those concerns. Mostly coming from two perspectives: overhead for existing contributor workflow, the other is about occasional contributors (more likely familiar with GitHub PR flow and unlikely to have commit access anyway). I think there’s rough consensus in favor. I’d like to understand if there’s a significant chance for the tooling that Nikita wants to not work? If we think it can work, not much reason to delay.
- Nikita: hard to say without trying it; I would really like to try it before making a decision. This could have been implemented a long time ago (RFC is up for months). No need to rush the decision now.
- Aaron: looking at it from the clang subcommunity perspective, I think the clang community was opposed, which was interesting. I don’t know if this is old-school contributors not willing to change their ways. We have only recently got pre-commit CI to work fast enough, and we did not re-enable some of the checks. Do we have headroom to increase CI workload by 15%?
- Petr: the short answer is yes, we recently had a bug where we lost half of the capacity but we haven’t seen any negative impact on latency. This indicates the system is currently overprovisioned. It is also designed to scale up and down if needed.
- Aaron: the other problem is email deluge. If you are automatically added to PRs that you normally wouldn’t need to review, this increases your review load.
- Vlad: we have enough capacity to test lldb on CI. I would also wait for the tooling and compare with existing workflows. It’s been 3 years since we’ve been promised to have tooling to cleanup user and revert branches, but it has not been delivered.
- Renato Golin: there’s a big difference between mandatory PRs and mandatory PR reviews. I understood it was only for mandatory PRs, not review. How do we say “do not review this”. The only value from mandatory PRs is that it’s now in the web interface. If a PR is merged immediately, it still shows up in my email, but I see it has been merged.
- Petr: Renato said want I wanted to say. We are discussing mandatory PRs, not mandatory reviews. If it encourages people to request reviews, I’d like that\!
- Aaron: I routinely have 400-500 of these per day. The signal-to-noise ratio is high. Maybe we shouldn’t auto-add people to review.
- Petr: can you send me an example where you get auto-added where you didn’t want to me.
- Alex: these are configurable through Github codeowners.
- Renato: if we start using tags, like `@dont-review`, then you can filter in your email. There is something we can do infrastructurally to help people who get a lot of these emails to help them filter.
- Aaron: I’m hesitant to rely on label because new contributors don’t know those. But new contributors wouldn’t be pushing to main directly. This goes to Nikita’s point on the tooling.
- Petr: it would be nice to know which tooling, I heard the script and the email flow. We would appreciate some feedback from people who have been using it. We’ve been through rounds of reviews, but nobody involved in the discussion is pushing to main directly. We don’t have good data on that PR.
- Nikita: it’s fine to merge it and then process the feedback. Also post in on the RFC thread because it’s not linked from anywhere.
- Aaron: I can’t run the script, it’s a bash script and I’m on Windows.
- Petr: it’s not our script. We have a separate one, which is a python script that should go into LLVM utils.
- Vlad: the RFC would help release managers to their job on their release branch, given that we are branching in mid-January. We should explicitly say whether this is happening or not…
- Petr: for release managers, we can give everyone exception to push to main and turn on the github option.
- **Action Item: Alex to make a draft and send around to project council**
- **Decision: hold Project Council meetings 2nd Wed of the month at 2pm ET for a regular cadence (next project council can update it if they want)**

# November 19, 2025

Meeting link: [meet.google.com/cyp-jxvf-kkb](https://meet.google.com/cyp-jxvf-kkb)

Notes:

- Reid (raised the issue to the project council): Contributors from Google want to add the SFrame feature. Fangrui (MaskRay) pointed out technical deficiencies and raised concerns about the cost of implementing and maintaining. There may be a pattern of proposals being blocked because of the maintenance cost. Should we clarify this at the policy level? Specifically, we have wording around being welcoming to new contributors/contributions.
- Aaron: do we have stats on the number of active contributors? If there are not enough maintainers, the pushback may be due to that.
- Reid: I did stats of `git log`,  in [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-sframe-support-to-llvm/86900/19?u=rnk](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-sframe-support-to-llvm/86900/19?u=rnk) and the maintainer/lead contributor is at \~340 commits vs 17 for the next.
- Peter: I actually worked on the ELF backend 5 years ago and am still in the list of major contributors. I have a stack of changes that were not landed over similar objections. The current major contributor is just pushing code directly to lld without PR and not necessarily review. The successful strategy has been to implement things in GNU ld first so then lld is made compatible with it. This kind of behavior also feels discouraging for new contributors. We’ve been pushing changes to other backends and the experience there was different. I asked the person in question about their behavior and they said there was nobody else to maintain, but maybe nobody dares.
- Alex: the maintainer list [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/lld/Maintainers.md](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/lld/Maintainers.md) doesn’t have Fangrui on it; has the contributor volunteered to main things.
- Sterling Augusting: I am the contributor of that and I volunteered to maintain to no avail.
- Reid: We can ask Arthur Eubanks if they wants to be a maintainer.
- Peter: Peter Smith from Arm and Daniel Thornburgh from Google.
- Aaron: What I’m hearing from the project council is that we have to update the maintainers list, which kind of gets us unstuck, and also in the scope of the project council. We can also add more maintainers to the smaller subprojects in a batch process.
- Alex: I’m not sure we can just nominate people, our role is to ensure the list is up to date, it’s the role of the lead maintainer.
- Aaron: there no being the lead maintainer is part of the problem. Is Fangrui de-facto the lead maintainer?
- Reid: de facto yes, he is the biggest contributor.
- Peter: Is there scope for an LLD area team? It will be then up to the contributors to elect members of that in the area team.
- David: It may hit the same problem as the mlir area team, and we may also not have enough volunteers.
- Peter: this goes back to the question of whether maintainers have the veto power.
- Alex:
- Aaron: my understanding was that maintainers are more privileged because they are trusted by the community. But a stronger voice doesn’t mean veto.
- Reid: In the last round, there was a discussion of who can block changes?
- Alex: I’d expect that the area team makes the decision, but there’s no area team there, so this is being escalated to the project council. We should step in and call if there is rough consensus or not.
- Aaron: maintainers can take of most of things and make decisions, only when they can’t or are challenged, the area team should step in.
- Petr: from me following the thread, it looks like there is consensus to have the feature.
- Alex: \[lists action items below\]
- Reid: What about the maintainers list?
- Aaron: we should at least install the lead maintainer
- Petr: it may not make sense because there is not much shared code. Can we find someone who is not attached to a particular backend?
- Aaron: This makes me want a lead maintainer even more so none of the backend outweighs all the others.
- Reid: just settling for multiple maintainers for each backend may be good enough to make progress.

—

- Petr: This is a follow-up from the previous meeting. The discussion is stalled, many people in favor and some opposed. We had a roundtable at the dev meeting. We are addressing concerns, e.g., about using PRs without changing the workflow drastically, guidelines on post-commit reviews. I’d really like a yes/no answer. This is not the first time we are having this discussion, I found an old RFC from Tom Stellard with a similar proposal that is also stalled.
- Alex: procedurally, we may want to decide without Petr who is also on the project council.
- Aaron: Was this discussed in the infrastructure area team.
- Petr: this was even in the platform we were running on for the area team election.
- Aaron: if the area team is unanimous on that, there’s no problem in Petr communicating that.
- Petr: I’d also like to get the result before the next project council so we don’t pass this on to them undecided.
- David: The hope is to have a motivated answer.
- Alex: If we don’t decide offline by the next meeting, we will start it with a vote.
- Reid: there will always be people who may be negatively affected, “disagree and commit”.

—

- The Clang area team decided to expand team size to 5 starting next year; we need to both grow leaders and share the workload better.
- Petr: Maybe each area team can have some sort of retrospective. Did you decide on 5 to avoid ties?
- Aaron: tie breaking. Though we didn’t have a case where we needed a tie breaker.
- Petr: are the project council decisions to create new teams or expand teams

- , are these decisions carried over to the next teams.
- Aaron: I think it makes sense to continue with the area teams.
- Reid: created area teams will keep operating.
- Petr: we never figured out the community team, should we try again for the next election cycle?
- Alex: What is the scope of the community team?
- David: better unify moderators and interact with CoC.
- Aaron: Let's put it on the next project council agenda.

Action Items:

- Put “maintainers don’t have the veto right” into a policy.
- Support updating the lld maintainers list
- [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com)[Alex Zinenko](mailto:ftynse@gmail.com)[npopov@redhat.com](mailto:npopov@redhat.com)to read the [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-sframe-support-to-llvm/86900](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-sframe-support-to-llvm/86900) thread and conclude (offline) whether we see rough consensus; provide a motivated answer;
- project council: (re-)read the [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164) thread and decide whether we see rough consensus; provide a motivated answer.

Topics:

* [\[RFC\] Adding SFrame support to llvm](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-sframe-support-to-llvm/86900)
  * [Comment](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-sframe-support-to-llvm/86900/26?u=rnk) explains that this is a disagreement between contributors and the lead maintainer, and that it should be escalated to the project council. Q for secretary, is this appropriate?
  * Reid: Most commenters agree the format has significant deficiencies, but what should our bar for excellence be for features as a project? LLVM/MLIR are full of niche extensions, and we usually try to find ways to work together to keep things maintainable. Should we have a coherent project policy encouraging maintainers to unblock contributors, seek compromise, welcome niche contributions, or should we maintain high standards of excellence, and use LLVM’s leverage to encourage contributors to aspire for more (in this instance, fully subsume .eh\_frame)?
  * There is a pattern of behavior here of blocking contributions due to concerns about maintenance cost and design simplicity.
    * ICF safe mislinks objects with ADRP/LDR instructions split across sections, [blocked PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/139493) from pranavk
    * Folks from Meta (Wenlei He & Alexander Yermolovich) have been unable to upstream patches for Buck support, relocation overflow warnings, and other functionality over similar grounds of technical complexity.
  * Possible outcome: Some statement that the project council feels that the LLD lead maintainer is being insufficiently open to new contributions, not “LLD should implement sframes”
    * Clearly, we expect maintainers to have high standards, and to push back against needless complexity. However, we expect maintainers to seek to grow the project, and delegate and share power when possible so we can sustain LLVM and its subprojects over the long term. LLVM is intended to be shared, open infrastructure for building HPC toolchains.
    * The values of openness and inclusivity are grounded in lots of aspirational text (the “shoulds”, not the “should nots”) in the [developer policy](https://llvm.org/docs/DeveloperPolicy.html) and [code of conduct](https://llvm.org/docs/CodeOfConduct.html).
* [RFC: Require Pull Requests for all llvm-project commits](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164)
  * Discussed at the [LLVM Developers Meeting Round Table](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/operational-maturity-round-table-notes/88898).
  * The [script to use PRs over pushing to main](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/166473) is under review.
  * We're planning to publish guidelines for post-commit reviews.
  * Proposal: Remove the direct push exception on January 31\.
    * This should give us sufficient time to land all changes.
    * We don't want the RFC to slip into the next election cycle.
* FYI from Clang Area Team
  * [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/expanding-clang-area-team-size-to-5-in-2026/88896](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/expanding-clang-area-team-size-to-5-in-2026/88896)
  * Expanding to five people, starting next year
  * Doing so to help build up more leaders in the community, share the work around more

# October 1, 2025

Meeting link: [https://meet.google.com/jfk-mhmh-obx](https://meet.google.com/jfk-mhmh-obx)

Topics:

- RFC on requiring pull requests:
  - Petr: I posted the RFC but the whole infra team worked on. The project council may want to weigh in. There was a lot of support and some disagreement. Could be a good trial of the governance process.
  - Lucile Nihlen: I read through the concerns. Many of them are being addressed. The remaining one is an interconnect of two issues: (1) resentment of the past move from Phabricator to Github; people feel they previous concerns weren’t heard; (2) a slippery slope towards commit-blocking reviews. It is a valid concern. Google is under pressure to raise the bar for review practices in LLVM. In my discussions with various people about mandatory review, it seems that reviewers being oversubscribed is the main problem. If we required review for non-trivial changes, it could lead to reviewer burnout. We do need to be reviewing more code. We may want to change the review culture, and also have more Google engineers doing review if Google wants more review. Given Google’s footprint, how can we increase the amount of reviews they do. Maybe we can have more process about post-commit review to see if code is reviewed in timely fashion.
  - Petr: around the world, govts started looking seriously at software supply chain security, which is particularly important for companies that are govt suppliers. There is also regulatory pressure. This sometimes transpires as suggestions to stop funding LLVM development from companies. Google is not the only entity that feels this regulatory pressure, any major company may be in the same position. We need to start thinking about this now.
  - Nikita: I already wrote that on the RFC. We need to provide tooling that makes it easier to push changes through PRs. Without that, I can’t evaluate how much it will affect workflow.
  - Petr: I can try enabling this and give everyone a blanket exception. Then we can discuss about removing the exception.
  - Lucile: I talked privately with other vendors, and they may not be feeling the regulatory pressure, yet. Google lives close to LLVM HEAD, unlike many other companies, which increases pressure on them. If Google starts doing more reviews, maybe the next companies that feels the pressure will follow up. We may have a virtuous cycle in having companies contribute more thanks to that. Our security council says, more or less, there is a year or two to figure it out, otherwise make a hard fork.
  - Vlad Serebrenikov: clang maintainers mention that moving from Phabricator to Github decreased 2x their review bandwidth. Enabling mandatory review will inevitably lead to “two classes” of contributors.
  - Alex: \<\<\>\>\>
  - Nikita: from public perception, people seem to be more concerned with testing rather than code review. We often have buildbots that are broken regularly.
  - Petr: I tried to decouple the RFC from mandatory review, but the discussion keeps circling back to that. We already have a two-tier system for LLVM. There are things that become simpler thanks to github query interface.
  - Alex: That’s great, put that in the answer. This may show reviewers that they gain something from this change.
  - Vlad: Keep in mind that effects of policy changes will be seen in 10 years.
  - Reid: going back to how can we sell this to the community? We need data to show that the situation is improving. People may disagree, and the point of the project council is to break ties. I’ve been exploring off-the-shelf tools ([Grimoirelab](https://github.com/chaoss/grimoirelab/blob/main/README.md)) to measure time-to-review, but nothing shareable yet. [Example metrics for Eclips](https://eclipse.biterg.io/app/dashboards#/view/GitHub-Pull-Requests-Timing)
  - Nikita: Part of the problem is the benefits are not visible for an individual contributor, they are more visible at the project or company level. This creates a strange power disbalance.
  - Petr: It may not be immediately obvious.
  - Alex: can we have a blueprint for company folks to sell this internally.
  - Lucile: it may not be that hard, Google requires all internal code to be reviewed, it sounds reasonable to also mandate review of code we contribute and use.
  - Vlad: the timeline aspect is important. While we have infrastructure for PRs, people still make direct pushes. Why are people doing that? Out of habit or other reasons?
  - Petr: when we switched to Github, direct commits were \~50%, now they are at \~25%. The majority of them come from \<10 contributors. I’m not comfortable putting these contributors on the spot:
  - Vlad: do we understand why the amount of unapproved commits goes down?
  - Petr: combination of factors. We’ve seen some people switching to PRs. But there are also a lot of newcomers who predominantly use PRs.
  - Nikita: I started creating more PRs because I can get pre-merge testing.
  - Alex: let’s wrap up.
  - Petr: I plan on responding to the RFC with what is discussed.
  - Alex: my suggestion is to ask people for feedback and direct suggestions.
  - Petr: we can have a roundtable at the dev meeting as well.

- Developer meeting
  - Petr: we have a slot at the developer meeting for the updates from the project council, as recommended by the policy document. I was hoping that members of different area teams who are around can present.
  - Alex: we can send emails and ask who is around.

Action Items:

- Alex: figure out next project council meeting date and format
- Petr: contact area team members about the dev meeting slot
- Everyone: reconvene next time for the mandatory PR discussion.

# Agenda for Aug 20, 2025

Meeting link: [meet.google.com/urn-svym-psq](http://meet.google.com/urn-svym-psq)

Action Items from Last Meeting

* Petr: put together a PR as a stake-in-the-ground for getting governance documented more centrally
  * Not yet, out for the last while
  * Planning to reuse existing work to get it started, will likely also be reused for the LLVM Dev meeting
* Alex will send a poll for the next meeting and for a potential recurrent time slot.
  * Current time slot works for folks
  * Do we want to do it every month or every four weeks? Petr prefers a fixed schedule (every four weeks) as it makes for less conflicts for him
  * We’ll go with every four weeks (instead of monthly)
* Everyone: come up with a documentation consolidation RFC.
  * Still on the queue
  * Purpose is to clarify what policies are project-wide vs. per-subproject
  * Reid: How does this prioritize w.r.t. Clarifying governance (task \#1)?
  * Petr: Perhaps step 1 is creating a place for top-level project policy, then pulling llvm DeveloperPolicy text can be drawn in piecemeal. Points of divergence: code style, testing strategy, etc
  * Aligns with top-level cmake work (why do we configure builds with cmake ../llvm…)
  * Making a top-level dir typically requires an RFC. Would also want to decide on a URL. Where is this hosted? [llvm.org/docs](http://llvm.org/docs) is for llvm-project/llvm
  * Petr will do the RFC for the top-level directory, Reid will help
* Alex: communicate acceptance of the lighthouse project.
  * Done and the repository has been created: [https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse](https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse)
* Reid: Will draft additional developer policy text on tool-assisted generated contributions requiring. Contributors using tools to generate contributions, text or code, have an increased burden of proof to justify why their contribution is worth spending time reviewing. Project review resources are precious and scarce. Contributors are encouraged to label tool-generated contributions and provide justification why it is worth spending reviewer time on the proposal, issue, or code. Reviewers who suspect that a contribution is low-effort and low-value can respond by linking to this policy and asking the contributor to provide a stronger rationale for why the contribution justifies the effort to review the contribution. Repeated violations of this policy, such as by responding with the aid of tools, will result in escalating moderation actions, such as locking the thread or PR, and potentially escalating to a project ban.
  * [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/154441](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/154441) – posted yesterday (sorry for lack of lead time)
  * PR is under active discussion
  * Potential case study to try applying the new policy to: [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/154401](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/154401)
  * Non-native speakers are a valid use case; but that’s the user using a tool to translate their English into something better, but the kinds of AI contributions we want to avoid are ones where they used the AI to do the writing in the first place
  * A simple policy (no AI) is easier to execute, and simplicity matters to avoid wasting time.
  * What conversation do we want to have, an argument about whether AI was used, or an argument about the value of the contribution?
  * Reid will make some edits to the wording based on feedback during discussion and will post an RFC to discourse
* Project Council: figure out the criteria for lead maintainers. We also shouldn’t just block a nomination because “there is an objection”. Alex will draft an idea and share with the folks who were in the call for further input.
  * Tabling discussion until Alex is available
  * [What do we expect of a (lead) maintainer](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11xiMEBzottR6Wn0HSYOF3fy2XPpLAudJXaVYxiVqan4/edit?tab=t.0) (access restricted)

Agenda

* How can the community engage with the project council?
  * Currently have a way to tag the project council on Discord, Discourse, and GitHub 👍
  * Petr: this came up when giving an update on governance, there are differences between area teams. Clang Area team is private, others are open. Same with area team notes, some are read-only some not. Do we want to make them more uniform, or is this the kind of freedom we want for area teams? Same goes for project council. There’s also going to be a session at the dev meeting to gather feedback. That’s a good place to ask the community how they feel and what the pain points are.
  * Reid: is this a panel?
  * Petr: decided against a panel, we didn’t know who was going to attend. Tanya suggested putting it on the schedule as a special session, same way that foundation updates happen. Everyone from area teams and project council is encouraged to come onto the stage. There will be a few slides of overview, but leave most space for Q\&A.
  * Nikita: current status is Alex is creating discourse posts for project council meetings (pre-announced and meeting minutes). That seems like a fine approach to me. And our meetings are open, folks outside of the project council are attending already, which is good
  * Jacques: cannot DM the project council on Discourse which is a problem. But this is on the LLVM calendar so it’s announced and open. We’re already pretty visible. Once folks are more aware of how the project council works, they’ll be more likely to interact.
  * Reid: starting by fixing documentation will help
  * Petr: another option would be to create a Google Group for each and project council. Foundation has a way to support that.
  * Going to improve docs, get feedback from the developer meeting, and then decide what to do after that.
  * Petr: having the differences between area teams helps the community to decide what they like and don’t like, so the next groups (after elections) can react to that feedback
* Community-wide issues engaging outside of the community?
  * Bounds safety RFC is a good example; no way to communicate with any of the constituent groups directly, makes our participation really challenging
  * Should/could there be a bidirectional Discourse / email bridge?
  * LLVM PoV: Mostly self-contained. What about Rust? Actually, they don’t use mailing lists. Main contact point is github.
  * LLVM Foundation administration of mailman was unsustainable, unlikely to return. Google Groups are an option for a managed solution.
  * Fragmentation is another major concern.
  * Prior art: [generic-abi@googlegroups.com](mailto:generic-abi@googlegroups.com) , [libc-coord](https://www.openwall.com/lists/libc-coord/) (?) coordination point for libc impls, whatever happened to itanium cxxabi list ([https://github.com/itanium-cxx-abi/cxx-abi](https://github.com/itanium-cxx-abi/cxx-abi) so similar to Rust)
* 2026 area team election preparations
  * Tom set up Elekto last time
  * Should be brought up under infrastructure area team as well
  * Put on the next agenda, didn’t have time to discuss this time

#

# Agenda for July 17, 2025

Meeting link: [https://](https://meet.google.com/eva-vywf-fve)[meet.google.com/ojz-umdr-gfg](http://meet.google.com/ojz-umdr-gfg)

Action Items from Last Meeting

* Petr: put together a PR as a stake-in-the-ground for getting governance documented more centrally
* Alex will send a poll for the next meeting and for a potential recurrent time slot.
* Everyone: come up with a documentation consolidation RFC.

Agenda

* MLIR project lighthouse incubator request \- [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-mlir-project-lighthouse/86738](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-mlir-project-lighthouse/86738)
* MLIR lead maintainers PR request ([https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/146928\#issuecomment-3033013532](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/146928#issuecomment-3033013532))
* Revising the policy on AI contributions
* How can the community engage with the project council?

Notes:
MLIR project lighthouse

* Alex: MLIR lighthouse is an incubator project, looking to move into the project. There’s no frontend currently. This will have build time dependencies, may download things like torch to run tests. Not super clear how to integrate that with infrastructure. It’s similar in spirit to llvm-test-suite, but more MLIR focused. The request is whether we want that as an incubator project or not.
* Nikita: how do incubators work? Are they part of the monorepo?
* Alex: separate from monorepo; this will never be merged into the monorepo. But it’s an incubator project because it’s desired to have the lower tier of support.
* Petr: we’ve had two other proposals under the LLVM organization on github, similar to llvm-test-suite. One is llvm integration test suite, the other is for offloading test suite. In both cases, those were separated for the same reasons as lighthouse. Dependent on other tools; didn’t feel right to include them in the main repo. They were brought up on the infrastructure area team. One discussion point was whether it’s better to keep those as separate repos or should they be integrated into llvm-test-suite. In the end, we decided to keep them separate. One reason because llvm-test-suite is not the best place, it has a lot of technical debt. If we want an additional layer for subprojects, we would probably need to clean that repo up. The other reason is related to automation, those really work best on a per-repo granularity. These repos will have a specific set of maintainers and who has access to what in terms of permissions. Easier to do on a per-repo basis. A lot of overhead that’s not worth it. Lighthouse feels exactly like the other proposals. So I support this.
* Petr: incubator may be confusing because those are intended to be integrated, but in this case this is never going to be the case. Maybe just make it clear in other ways (README.md) rather than incubator.
* Aaron: I don’t have a strong opinion one way or another, but there is no reason not to support it. Does this mean we need a separate category for test suites that is not “incubator”.
* Petr: all existing projects have a “-test-suite” suffix.
* Nikita: is the incubator terminology to avoid making it blocking, so people are free to break it?
* Renato (proposer): yes. I just wanted to get requirements from somewhere and those spelled out for the incubator are good. So ignore the “incubator” part.
* Aaron: okay, so it looks like the community code of conduct, etc.
* Aaron: it looks like we have consensus on accepting it.

Revising AI Policy

- Aaron: traditionally, we looked into the amount of effort that was put into writing a proposal to evaluate its quality. With LLMs, there is no longer a signal that a lot of thought went into the text. Reviewers are upset that they have to spend time responding to every point. We may want to change the policy to discourage this kind of behavior, but we don’t want to entirely disallow it, for example, if it is used as an autocomplete or spellcheck. The current policy puts weight on the reviewer should call out if they think the submission was generated with an LLM, which makes it harder for the reviewer. We could consider asking the original poster to confirm it really reflects their thoughts.
  - Relevant links:
    - [Current policy](https://llvm.org/docs/DeveloperPolicy.html#ai-generated-contributions)
    - Alleged LLM-generated RFCs?
      - [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-modern-c-alternative-to-tablegen-for-mlir-operation-definition/86800](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-modern-c-alternative-to-tablegen-for-mlir-operation-definition/86800) \- not alleged, the poster confirms they are using an LLM.
    - [New era of slop security reports](https://sethmlarson.dev/slop-security-reports)
    - [Alex Gaynor’s Claude-generated instcombine validated with Alive](https://simonwillison.net/2025/Jun/30/llvm/)
    - Clang review where contributor responded-by-LLM (TODO linkit)
    - [Rust policy](https://github.com/rust-lang/compiler-team/issues/893)
- Nikita: we had a similar discussion on Rust. There were PRs with typical LLM descriptions with bullet points that are long to say very little. There was a proposed policy to allow reviewers to reject obviously low-quality LLM-generated PR without addressing individual points. But there was opposition about making this specific about AI-generated rather than low-quality PRs in general, so it was decided to allow rejection for all such PRs, most of which are AI-generated.
- Petr: this is similar to the discussions we had at Google. There are other OSS projects taking a stronger stance on AI-generated content, up to completely rejecting. I don’t think these policies are going to stop people from sending AI-generating content. We shouldn’t spend time deciding whether the content was generated by AI, we could instead spend time to understand whether it is a good change or not. The main issue with AI content is the volume. That’s why we need a stricter policy that would give reviewers more power. Make it easier to reject contributions that are not providing any value. It shouldn’t be reviewer’s job to prove any value.
- Reid (drafted the existing policy on AI): when the policy was written, long-form LLMs were still on the horizon. We wanted to allow people to use Copilot, for example. I could spend more time on expanding the policy. Is this policy about AI-generated contributions? It should be broader. Contributors should advertise if they used a tool to generate the contribution. The bar for justification of that change would be higher. There is a precedent of an InstCombine change found/verified with Alive where the author disclosed that and explained why it is useful. SUch a policy would become a tool that reviewers could use with low effort, and ask the poster to
- Alex: it should not be restricted to either AI tools or PRs specifically, there was an RFC on MLIR that took several senior reviewer that the person was ptosting AI generated content verbatim. It wasn’t even clear the person was going to do the work. Being able to say “we’re not engaging with this” would be a good core of the policy. The burden of proof should be on the person using the tool. It’s about proportionality of effort between proposer and reviewer.
- Renato: if the problem is the amount of work we spent reviewing the change as opposed to creating it. If we had a tag saying “needs more work convincing the community that it is a useful change”
- Alex: we should be conscious of potential abuse of that; people can put a label on something as a way to stall it.
- Petr: what is the threshold for applying such a label? There is a spectrum between verbatim AI output and something like spellchecking.
- Reid: I don’t have an answer to the above, but the labeling/abuse question is about implementation. We can first define the policy, what we expect from the contributors.
- Aaron: our review bandwidth is one of the most precious resources. I’d like the policy to be favorable to reviewers to make a judgement call to say “I’m not reviewing this because \<policy-link\>”. The alternative would be for changes to be ignored.
- Alex: it’s also okay if one reviewer says they don’t want to review it by somebody else does.
- Aaron: our commit policy is a bit relaxed, but we will have to see with actual examples.
- Petr: do we want/have a stance on AI-assisted code reviews?
- Aaron: in our experience in clang, most of the suggestions are irrelevant or wrong with, e.g., coding style.
- Alex: similar experience in mlir.
- Idea: we can have the first-commit “welcome” message bot say it is not advisable to add co-pilot.
- Petr: I was thinking about a larger scale thing with reviews, like taking an entire PR, feeding it to an LLM and posting back the review.
- Alex: I think a review is a contribution.
- Aaron: this is also my opinion.

MLIR lead maintainers discussion

- Alex: we had a process to come up with a list of lead maintainers, asked the community to volunteer privately so people would not self-censor. We came up with a list of nominations for lead maintainers, submitted a first PR with the list we decided to nominate, which happens to be the same folks on the area team (not intentionally, just the way it worked out). We had someone raise concerns about the process by which we came up with the nomination, and they had a concern about a particular nomination. They didn’t want to single out the person they are concerned about. So the PR is currently blocked. I would like to get out of the project council how to proceed with this. It’s a bit outside of the existing policies because this is a new project.
- Mehdi (raised objections to the nomination PR): it’s the first time we nominate lead maintainers for MLIR, so there’s not a lot of precedent to lean on. The lack of criteria makes it hard to consider what is or isn’t a suitable person for the role. From the process point of view, having a list of nominations does not make it easy to address. Having individual PRs would be helpful for making progress. There’s a question of what do we expect from lead maintainers, what qualifies someone. Not saying we need strict thresholds in terms of engagement, but how do we recognize the right people for the role. With code owners, we often nominated people already doing the work. I brought some thoughts in the PR as a comment, but those are just my views.
- Aaron: there are two different things and we’d like to keep them somewhat separate. (1) we have an existing policy and an existing PR, what to do with it? (2) Should we change the policy to address it?  Regarding (1), I took a look, and it looks like the people nominated seem to be active on PRs, discourse, chats. Barring specific concerns one can defend against, I don’t see why we shouldn’t be moving forward with this. I don’t know if there is anything concrete?
- Mehdi: we need to establish criteria. You looked at PR comments, discourse, but there is also code. What if somebody only contributed to a niche part of the project?
- Aaron: I can clarify: multiple people are nominated so I don’t see why every single of them needs to have expertise across the entirety of the overall project. The important part is if they are willing to do the work required of the lead maintainer, including learning things about areas they don’t know yet, help other people. All these folks have been around for a while and know how to redirect the questions. They just need the ability to direct people to the right source.
- Nikita: the mlir situation is a bit different from other projects, and the proposed list of maintainers already has a hierarchy with additional categories. If it comes to people who are primarily involved in one area specifically, they should be on that category. I agree with Mehdi that they should not be the lead maintainer. But I am lacking specifics on objections. The point about nominating multiple people at once, this is not necessarily a problem. We have precedent on LLVM with backend nominations. I don’t think it makes sense to nominate a series of 4 PRs so people can comment on that. Maybe it’s different for lead maintainers, but generally I would not require that.
- Mehdi: you may be blocking the entire process because of one person.
- Aaron: you can always request to split one person off, this is no different from code PRs where things can be split. The bigger concern is, if there is an objection, this is really awkward and we don’t want to create a tension for people to work together. However, if the objection is not available, there is no way to defend against that or for the community to participate.
- Reid: what’s the alternative to the PR on the table?
- Mehdi: do we need to have four names?
- Reid: we do want redundancy and backup. We ended up with area teams so there is some redundancy. Four seems better than one or zero.
- Alex: there is a longer proposal; there’s four folks for lead maintainer, but there’s more hierarchy. We just didn’t want to try to do the entire list at once. The idea was to get the lead maintainers first, then that group will discuss the other maintainers
- Renato (nominated in the PR): clang and llvm both had an RFC on discourse with a whole list, but it takes a long time. Might not be a good idea. But it’s even more people so the process may take longer, but if it unblocks the PR, that’s good.
- Petr: even with separate PRs, the question is whether people will be willing to raise those objections on the PR. It seems right now the answer is no. So does breaking it up solve that? Or do we need an alternative mechanism for objections? The only alternative way I can think of are elections.
- Aaron: regarding elections, since the people nominated are also elected to the area team, are we getting any new information?
- Mehdi: I don’t know what is the role of the lead maintainer so I cannot object because of that.
- Aaron: we actually have a description in the policy. The point is that people are volunteering to do a lot of thankless work. And by getting too prescriptive about the role, we can make people not volunteer at all. We don’t want that. Maintainers were supposed to be a lightweight thing that people can come and go, and pick up again.
- Nikita: can we table this until next time but get the community unblocked by nominating the non-lead maintainers.
- Alex: are there any action items here? For the project council to think about the lead maintainer role?
- Aaron: We can try making the responsibilities clearer, but we also ensure a vague objection cannot block the process.
- Mehdi: I think we should come up with the criteria first. I chose not to quantify my objections because I don’t know what the criteria are.
- Renato: I agree that we should come up with the criteria.
- Reid: to restate, Mehdi would like to have criteria emphasizing past contributions and Aaron would like criteria about willingness to do the work of routing reviews, issue triage. Is that an accurate description?
- Aaron: I can clarify my point. I agree with Mehdi that we do need criteria, and I do think technical contributions are a part of those. My point on objections is that we are a community of 1000 people, we cannot be unanimous on anything.
- Alex: it looks like there is a violent agreement on the fact that we need to establish criteria. I suggest the project council to work on that and come up with an RFC.
- Jacques: lead maintainer is not a position of power, Aaron mentioned that. We should maybe make it clear in the documentation.

Action Items:

- Alex: communicate acceptance of the lighthouse project.
- Reid: Will draft additional developer policy text on tool-assisted generated contributions requiring. Contributors using tools to generate contributions, text or code, have an increased burden of proof to justify why their contribution is worth spending time reviewing. Project review resources are precious and scarce. Contributors are encouraged to label tool-generated contributions and provide justification why it is worth spending reviewer time on the proposal, issue, or code. Reviewers who suspect that a contribution is low-effort and low-value can respond by linking to this policy and asking the contributor to provide a stronger rationale for why the contribution justifies the effort to review the contribution. Repeated violations of this policy, such as by responding with the aid of tools, will result in escalating moderation actions, such as locking the thread or PR, and potentially escalating to a project ban.
- Project Council: figure out the criteria for lead maintainers. We also shouldn’t just block a nomination because “there is an objection”. Alex will draft an idea and share with the folks who were in the call for further input.
- Alex: schedule next project council meeting.

#

# Agenda for Jun 13, 2025

Meeting link: [https://meet.google.com/eva-vywf-fve](https://meet.google.com/eva-vywf-fve)

Action Items from Last Meeting

* Aaron: reach out to Anton/Tom/Tanya to set up a Group on Discourse and a Team on GitHub for the area teams and for the project council
  * Done
* Aaron will invite Chris B to the next project council meeting
  * Done
* Alex will send a poll for the next meeting and for a potential recurrent time slot.
  * Done
* Petr: put together a PR as a stake-in-the-ground for getting governance documented more centrally
  * Still working on it

Agenda

* Who is the project council’s liaison to the LLVM Foundation?
  * We can pick someone, but how does it work? Is that person an observer, or can they add items to the foundation’s agenda? Does the foundation need a vote in the project council? Does the project council need a vote in the foundation? Does the liaison need to provide a report to the foundation every month?
* Who is the project council chair?
  * Aaron
* Who is the project council secretary?
  * Alex
* Any RFCs we think we should look at?
* Maintainers for MLIR (we have a tentative plan)
* Policy wrt AI-generated content

Action Items:

* Alex will send a poll for the next meeting and for a potential recurrent time slot.
- Petr: put together a PR as a stake-in-the-ground for getting governance documented more centrally
- Everyone: come up with a documentation consolidation RFC.

Notes

- Aaron: Unclear how to set up email filters to see @-mentions of the project council / area teams.
- Aaron: Liaison between the project council and the foundation?
- Chris: Foundation is making changes to how its board operates: monthly meetings are not effective, the most important part is voting and that is about the mechanics of running the foundation as an entity.
- Chris: Trying to move to a subcommittees model, subcommittees produce recommendations and give them to the board.
  - Finance subcommittee
  - (Foundation) governance, e.g., bylaws
  - Legal subcommittee, e.g., licensing
  - TBD: “bridge” subcommittee for the community and its governance
- Chris: Expecting needs/requests from the community governance, e.g., project council, in particular finance and legal is where the foundation can operate.
- Chris: We would want subcommittees to have a board member on them
  - Community providing feedback for subcommittee mechanics
- Aaron: does the foundation want to send somebody to the project council? Looks like we can agree about that in a subcommittee.
- Chris: the foundation shouldn’t be putting weight on community governance.
  - The foundation is also set up to avoid corporate pressure.
  - The foundation members are not necessarily doing the day-to-day work in the community, at least not anymore.
- Aaron: I was thinking more about the foundation communicating to us, e.g., decisions February 4, 2026

Meeting link: [https://meet.google.com/vxz-xwzs-umv](https://meet.google.com/vxz-xwzs-umv)

Agenda:

* Bazel bot [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-ai-assisted-bazel-fixer-bot/89178](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-ai-assisted-bazel-fixer-bot/89178)
* Maintainers list refresh update from Aaron
  * Completed: libc, libcxx, lldb, flang, polly
  * Almost completed: clang, clang-tools-extra
  * Unknown: llvm, it’s a work in progress
  * Need to be done (high priority): lld, compiler-rt, mlir, libunwind
  * Need to be done (low priority): bolt, offload, third-party, utils
  * Don’t need maintainers list: cmake, cross-project-tests, llvm-libgcc, runtimes
  * Now have lead maintainers: libclc, libcxxabi, libsycl, openmp, orc-rt
* [RFC: Require Pull Requests for all llvm-project commits](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164)
  * [git-llvm-push](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/26b1f61c14768b8104c998ab2579391e5cc766ed/llvm/utils/git-llvm-push) script is available and appears to be used by at least some contributors
  * We updated the git-llvm-push script and auto-subscriber to reduce the amount of noise based on the feedback on the RFC
  * We now have a [workflow](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/178769) to prune unused branches
  * What's next for the RFC?
    * [Can we enable the “Require a pull request before merging” ruleset but give everyone the ability to bypass this rule for now?](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164/68)
    * Can we set a date/criteria for removing the bypass option?

Notes:

- Bazel bot discussion
- Aaron is getting a lot of feedback with frustration about the AI-generated stuff, with maintainers saying “I don’t bother to look at reviews anymore”. So we may tighten the AI policy, up to saying no AI at all, and it would be a shame if we had to remove the bazel bot.
- Aiden (author of the RFC): people maintaining the bazel build are in consensus that this is a reasonable thing to do, so I’m not too concerned about bandwidth there. In terms of AI policy, if it eventually changes, we will end up complying with that. The infrastructure is already set up, it’s a only a question of us creating PRs or not. I’d be a bit disappointed if all this work ends up for nothing, but we can live with that.
- Vlad: I objected to the initial proposal with AI-opened PR that humans will look at. Now it looks like humans are going to create the PR. Has the RFC changed in the meantime.
- Aiden: this was discussed on the RFC; having human create a PR doesn’t seem to address the concerns raised. I’d push for a bot creating it so it is obvious it is auto-generated.
- Alex: also in discussions with maintainers about the amount and value of changes. A lot of the changes we see are borderline extractive (not worth litigating). From what I understand is Bazel bot is that most people don’t care, and the people who do care are happy to have that. So it sounds like it wouldn’t be a problem from the intent of the policy (not extractive contributions).
- Aaron: does bazel have to be in-tree? Can it be in a separate repo given it’s a peripheral component?
- Aiden: the original intention of the RFC was that it only touches a small sub-community where there is consensus. As to Aaron’s point, it originally existed out of tree, and there was a long discussion. The main motivation is that a lot of companies and contributors benefit from it being in the monorepo, and there is also the versioning problem.
- Aaron: I figured it was too easy to get out of sync. That wasn’t a threat to remove bazel by the way. As far as I can tell, the RFC follows the policy, and the concerns are more to do with the AI policy. Based on that, I don’t see a reason not proceed with it. Especially since the proposer takes a stance that they will remove if it starts being against the policy.
- Aaron: is anybody in opposition?
- \<silence\>
- Aaron: then we consider it accepted.
- Peter: there is a precedent for GNBuild, with automated commits, it is not AI based. If the maintainer of that decides to replace that bot with an AI version. Does this decision set precedent?
- Nikita: GNBuild currently commits to main, so that would be a no-go, we will have to discuss again.
- Alex: same comment.
- Aaron: I’m not super-excited about this being precedent-setting as people can go all-in. Each situation is unique and we should keep that in mind.
- Vlad: if Google can put together a bot that opens pull requests, why are we asking people to review that?
- Alex: it is consistent with the policy, it’s if it’s AI and extractive that we’d say not interested. Here we have a bunch of reviewers who are willing to maintain the output (and are on call to handle fires).
-

- Aaron has been working through the maintainers list (see above for the status). Got good feedback from lead maintainers who felt disempowered to clean up the lists themselves.
- Nikita: I have been looking at llvm, but I just try to assess whether the maintainers are active.
- Aaron: I have been emailing maintainers at least to check if the address is correct, which was not the case for some of them. Otherwise, I have been creating github issues and assigning to them. A couple of people volunteered to step down or decided to do more reviews. It has been super labor-intensive. This was a good experience overall and I intend to keep doing it. We do have some high-priority ones: lld, compiler-rt and mlir are in an odd situation where they have no lead maintainers. Libunwind has no maintainers, I will start going through the commit list to find maintainers for it.
- Nikita: is libunwind maintained by libc++?
- Aaron: it’s a separate entry in the monorepo. But the three others are challenging.
- Nikita: lld has a pretty obvious lead maintainer, doesn’t it?
- Petr: context on libunwind, they are used together with libc++, but there is a tricky relationship. We may need to do a call for maintainers. lld and compiler-rt are also tricky. lld is four linkers in a trench coat, which are totally separate projects that don’t share infrastructure. Fangrui does maintain the ELF backend, but not a good fit for other backends. I don’t know if someone qualifies and is willing to take up the role. Compiler-rt is similar, if not worse, it’s a bunch of different runtime libraries. They just go into the same installation. There have been discussions in the past about work.
- breaking up compiler-rt into multiple projects, with some support, but nobody willing to put in the Aaron: it makes it easier to find a lead maintainer because they basically serve as redirection to other maintainers and need no particular expertise. We just need a person who is willing to step up.
- Alex: can we just guarantee that there is a maintainer for everything, e.g., top-level directory or next-level directory.
- Nikita: we don’t necessarily need a lead maintainer for each subproject. Compiler-rt is a bit more interesting. The unifying part of that is the build system, then the lead maintainer is the build system maintainer.
- Petr: do we even specify what is a top-level project? There are subdirectories that are not projects.
- Aaron: for some of these, just having a dispatcher may be helpful, in particular for uds.
- Alex: should we just name it differently?
- Aaron: coordinator?
- Vlad: point-of-contact?
- Aaron: should we try finding maintainers for `third_party`? A good example of that was a new pedantic diagnostic that broke Google’s benchmarks.
- Petr: having someone would be nice. The other one would be the build system. Maybe we should have a top-level maintainer for the build system. There’s a precedent with flang reorganization.
- Alex: maybe we should have the top-level cmake directory have a lead maintainer and then other projects inherit them.
- Petr: that’s the reason why we have a common third-party.
- Aaron: if it’s important enough to be in the monorepo, we should have somebody doing the housekeeping for them.
- Petr: the policy we have at google is to have an “owner” for each third-party dependency, and if there’s none, it’s deleted.
- Aaron: even if it is brutal, I think it is okay to try getting rid of unmaintained components or third-party. We don’t want to get too far though.

- Mandatory PR discussion
- Enable the ruleset and grant exception.
- Petr: I’d like to have a thumbs up on this.
- Nikita: granted.
- Alex: \+ 1\.
- Aaron: I don’t see any opposition to that.
- Aaron needs to drop as we are over time.

- Petr: we’ve made changes to address feedback. It wasn’t clear to me what were the criteria before we can consider it again.
- Nikita: you did everything that was asked from you, thanks for creating the script.
- Nikita: should we fix the gnbot being able to push to main? Overall, I’m not super favorable of this RFC but not anymore opposed.
- Petr: can we come up with a date by which the exception will be removed? If there are major blockers, we can push it back. But otherwise we could take silence as agreement.
- Nikita: looking through the commit log, almost everything is a PR. Should we do a one day trial?
- Petr: didn’t really think about it, but it’s something to consider.
- Alex: how about the following conclusion: the migration process should go forward and Petr will describe the specific process of how the exception will be removed: dates, experimentation stages, how to account for concerns.

Action item:

- Aaron: post conclusion on the bazel bot discussion. Be clear that this is not a precedent-setting decision.
- Alex: figure out the name for the lead maintainer alternative role and propose policy wording.
- Aaron: identifying places where we don’t have maintainers and we should; come up with a list of places where we need maintainers to be found, for clang and top level (filling it with people is a separate task).
- Alex: post conclusion on the mandatory RFC discussion.

# January 7, 2026

Meeting link: [meet.google.com/bxs-cpcy-fdv](http://meet.google.com/bxs-cpcy-fdv)

- Elections
- What is the scope of the community area team? Should it include moderators? CoC members?
- Lack of Project Council representation from (sub)projects that do not have an area team (Project Council is selected from area teams)
- Policy updates about maintainers
- AI policy [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-llvm-ai-tool-policy-human-in-the-loop/89159](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-llvm-ai-tool-policy-human-in-the-loop/89159)

Notes:

- Aaron: Redhat may be able to run the election on the same system, likely nothing else is needed beyond our input on the area teams to be re-conducted or created.
- We as the project council should tell the community that the nominations are open.
- Aaron: Dates are in line with what we did last year, we don’t know of any complaints about these specific dates.
- Reid: we originally targeted these dates so that people are back from vacation. But there were some people who weren’t aware that this was happening. We can do better job with announcements.
- Aaron: having consistent dates helps with that, “it’s the election season”.
- Renato: maybe some people may miss it now, but we can’t do much better than this. Any feedback on the voting system.
- Aaron: no negative feedback that I know of.
- Renato: I only heard good things.
- Aaron: did anybody hear bad things?
- \<silence\>
- Decided the dates should be:
  - January 12, 2025 \- Area Team nominations begin
  - January 26, 2025 \- Voting opens
  - February 9, 2025 \- Voting closes
  - February 10, 2025 \- Results announced on Discourse
- Alex: elaborating on the representation, did folks from lld vote for anybody?
- Aaron: community area team is for something that affects the whole area team, like the code of conduct.
- Nikita: so effectively the community team would subsume topics that are currently escalated to the project council.
- Aaron: yes.
- Chris: crafting the scope was tricky when we wrote the documents. We envisioned something like the code of conduct, moderation policy (we don’t really have one), moving off of mailing lists/IRC. Looking how does the community operate / make decisions and continue to exist in a healthy way.
- Renato: there’s overlap, it’s a better place to put the community stuff. I’m sometimes asked to mediate in some technical disagreement. If there was a community team, I could work with them to help me on this. It would be better to have a group of people who are better than me at that.
- Aaron: I don’t think we can move the CoC committee under the team because it needs a legal shield of the Foundation.
- Renato: there is a softer approach than doing full CoC.
- Nikita: my high-level concern is we have multiple teams responsible for whole-project concerns: infra, community and the project council. There may be a problem if many bodies are responsible for the same concerns. From what I hear, it’s more of the communication team: discourse, discord, moderation.
- Aaron: that’s a good observation, I was thinking about svn to git.
- Nikita: I’d draw the line where git belongs to infra and mailing lists belongs to communication.
- Aaron: it seems reasonable to me to have both
- Nikita: then who makes the decision?
- Alex: I was going to ask about the role of the Project Council? Then it can arbitrate between the team.
- Alex: now with the communications team, I was thinking that policy questions should go to the Project Council.
- Reid: what about the community area team drafting policy proposals and project council vetting those somehow? This is similar to how we have the CoC and the committee that interprets. Maybe we tweak the names to moderation team.
- Petr: it’s equivalent to Rust moderation team (Chris B also says in the chat).
- Alex: Reid’s point starts to look like separation of power between legislative, executive and judicial.
- Aaron: this keeps the question open, especially about communication, who decides to do the change if we have a moderation team? I don’t know if a communication team makes sense given that we don’t change these too often.
- Reid: iterating on the policy-writing group, I did a pass editing a developer policy, and the infra team put out a PR policy. Do we think that the community team should be responsible for updating the developer policy? This is not communication. Is this the responsibility of the infra team or community team? Moderation may not be the right name then.
- Petr: is it even responsibility of the area team? Everybody should be able to send these proposal.
- Renato: it’s not the people who come up with idea, but supposed to see something missing in the document, e.g., auto-merge. The policy group can then pick it.
- Aaron: I don’t think the goal for the project council was to be making and implementing policy.
- Reid: I was going to respond to Renato’s point on who proposes changes. Something we’ve observed, when you give people a formal role, they start doing things and behaving more like a leader. Many major changes were proposed by area team leads. I don’t want to change the open nature of the LLVM, but area team leads are people with the biggest stake in how the project leads. It seems reasonable to say the responsibility is looking for gaps.
- Aaron: we probably don’t have the scope. I don’t want us to rush.
- Reid: we’ve made some progress, but not really ready yet and it’s too short.
- Petr: I would be also interested in what other projects are doing. Is there something we can learn from them?

- Alex: moving to the representation. lld discussion felt a bit odd.
- Aaron: it should be the responsibility of the project council to ensure representation.
- Petr: the area teams are also responsible for the maintainers list. Some people at Google assumed it felt under the LLVM area team, some others that it falls under Project Council. But there are other things, like runtimes, libc++, etc.
- Nikita: my understanding that everything that falls through the cracks go the the Project Council. The issue is that the Project Council is not directly elected. So somebody who works on, e.g., lld, can only elect through some other area team. Maybe for the next time, we can have direct election.
- Renato: not every project needs an area team. We have maintainers who were doing the role of area team before. My understanding is that we have need more people on the “soft” problems that maintainers can’t handle.
- **Aaron: I’ll take an action item going through maintainer lists and poke people to make it up to date.**
- Alex: not suggesting to change right now, but maybe we can have a direct election for one seat at the project council.
- Renato: can we make an area team for the lead maintainers of projects that don’t have an area team?

- Alex: we have subprojects with no lead maintainers, maybe we can just ensure coverage?
- Nikita: there’s a lot of stuff that wouldn’t be covered.

- Chris: we need someone to run the election. We need proctors who are not running in the election. I’m happy to do that since I’m not running, but it is probably better to have more than one person. Last time, I was on a zoom call with people and recorded it. We need at least one other person.
- Alex: can we livestream it?
- Chris: I will try soliciting Mike Edwards who’s on the foundation board, who is not running, so there is at least a second person. Otherwise I’ll come back with an alternate suggestion.
- Chris: Tanya suggested that we create email lists for area teams. We can also have an elections mailing list, so nominations go there.
- No objections

- Nikita: I think the policy Reid proposed has broad support in the thread.
- Aaron: I have not had time to read the thread, so I’d like a day to verify. But before my break, it looked like going towards a consensus.
- Alex: there’s one person arguing against the policy saying it would preclude non-expert contributors.
- Nikita: i’ll point out this is not an established contributor.
- Renato: agreed
- Chris: this is a person who attacked multiple OSS projects, they are responsible for MESA AI policy, they also tried to weaponize the CoC.
- Reid: it is sort of the point of excluding non-compiler experts or at least aspiring experts from contributing.
- Petr: I’m supportive of the policy.
- **Action item: Alex to draft a resolution doc.**

- Alex: do we hold another meeting in February, just before the election results are announced?
- **Decision: hold a meeting on Feb 4, same time slot.**

- Caroline: it’s difficult to find information about governance from [llvm.org](http://llvm.org)
- **Petr: it was an action item for me.**

# December 10, 2025:

Meeting link: [meet.google.com/kqk-mhsj-eqt](http://meet.google.com/kqk-mhsj-eqt)

- Voting for decisions on
  - SFrame discussion
  - Mandatory PR discussion

Notes:

- Sframe discussion
- Aaron: there were non-linker bits and linker bits to the proposal, nobody seems to be opposed to the non-linker bits. Fangrui identified some technical concerns with Sframe as a design, but those were communicated to the appropriate body controlling the ELF spec. Other tools have already invested into this. The question is whether the PR is deeply technically flawed, which I’m not qualified to judge. I may be biased because of the WG21 for clang taking years to revise things. So maybe there is a weak consensus on having it under a flag.
- Alex: two discussions, one technical mostly on the merits of sframe (partly on cost of having it in the binary) and a discussion of maintainership and who gets to decide. I don’t see consensus on either of those. On one side, we have a very detailed argument on the design of sframe; the proposers didn’t seem to address things like binary cost, which probably should be addressed. As for maintainers, Sterling can volunteer to step up as a maintainer. That could be a way to solve the maintenance costs. More people concerned than just Fangrui. But LLVM is not the place to say “this is a good spec” vs bad spec; we can provide feedback. But we shouldn’t be opposed just because we think the spec is bad unless there’s a strong reason to.
- Petr: I agree to an extent that we are not in the position to decide whether the spec is good or not. C++ is a great example where we don’t really discuss that, but there is an official standard body. Sframe is merely a community agreeing on it. If we look at C or C++ extensions where LLVM/Clang decided not to implement them, e.g., the nested functions GCC extension. Is Sframe in the same category?
- Vlad Serebrenikov: re c++, if we see major problems with a C++ spec, we don’t accept the PR until the serious defect in the spec is resolved.
- Aaron: in clang, if it’s in the standard, we try our best to implement it; if we see a problem, we go back to the committee; if they don’t agree to fix it, we sometimes ignore the spec as the last resort.
- Petr: I also read the discussion on LKML and Fangrui’s blog post. The biggest issues are it being non-compact and non-concatenable, no linker-gc. Some of these may be fixable. After reading the LKML discussion, it was pointed out that these are intentional consequences of the design rather than deficiencies. Sframe was meant to be “simple” frame format, not “short”, so it was not expected to be compact. There is now exploration into other formats for stack unwinding. It’s a large design space where it is okay to have different points: the most compact format that is difficult to use that may co-exist with a less compact but easier format. In LLVM, there are things like dsym/gsym that occupy different design points. Just because Sframe is in a certain design point, we shouldn’t reject it because we don’t like that point. I don’t see a problem with having Sframe and some future format. The open question is around evolution, the v2 and v3 discussion, this is a technical discussion to be figured out by the maintainers, not necessarily a topic for the project council.
- Nikita: I liked the analogy with the GNU extensions for the C++ compiler, this is the same but at the ELF level. This comes down to how many people are looking to adopt it at this point of time. Fangrui makes a good case for why SFrame is not a good choice for userspace, but people are still willing to pay, e.g., 5% size increase for that feature. If there is sufficient buy-in or interest to use this format in its current form, we should not block its inclusion.
- Aaron: I thought this was behind a flag.
- Nikita: Yes, with a caveat that it may be enabled on the distribution level.
- Petr: This is similar to frame pointers, you have an option to turn them on or off at distribution level. This comes with tradeoffs.
- Aaron: the conclusion seems to be “we don’t have a strong reason not to have it”, though there is no strong support.
- Alex: did we identify weak consensus or are we overriding the discussion?
- Aaron: I think there is a majority in favor.
- Nikita: Indu Bhagat in the call who worked on the GNU side of this.
- Indu: there are multiple concerns Fangrui raised. One of them is to design stack tracing and stack unwinding format simultaneously. These have different requirements, especially with a compact representation. Reconciling this is fundamentally impossible. The timeline for v3: there is a proposal open for testing, unless no serious problems are found, it may be expected in the next binutils release around January. Size on Aarch64 can be addressed. Sframe is not meant for stack unwinding, this is a big problem for the GNU/Linux community between kernel and userspace, it was hard to solve that individually.
- Nikita: should we just wait for v3 then?
- Indu: it’s up to the LLVM community… As for GNU, we will drop support for generating v2 but will support reading it.
- Nikita: the non-concatenability issue is not something that can be resolved?
- Indu: this is not the only format that cannot be concatenated. Every time you have a format with index, it cannot be.
- Petr: we may be conditioned on users adopting Sframe, do we know are there any major Linux distributions shipping it? Maybe Sterling
- Sterling: just now, somebody posted “we are interested on Gentoo to explore v2, maybe Fedora as well”
- Petr: the question was more if somebody is already shipped that.
- Indu: we coordinated with the distros to hold back on having v2 binaries at distro level.
- Sterling: I would be much easier to experiment if it was in tree. I am happy to put it behind some “do-not-use” flag.
- Vlad: I would be very unfortunate if Fangrui quit maintaining lld over this.
- Alex: we could ask for Sterling to step up as the maintainer and put everything behind a flag. That may be a broader consensus.
- Aaron: so we are making a recommendation and asking if there are serious concerns about that?
- Indu: I’d suggest getting v2 in because it helps weeding out bugs together.
- Aaron: are we asking for maintainership? experimental flag? asking v2 or suggesting the community to decide? Whatever we can do for the community to be comfortable.
- Nikita:
- Alex: we don’t have objections to this being in-tree provided there is a dedicated maintainer. Given that, let folks iron out specifics of flags and versions in the PR rather than determine technical decisions here.
- **Action Item: Alex to make a draft and send around to project council**

- Mandatory PR discussion
- Nikita: we should defer that (again) because the tooling is not yet implemented.
- Alex: from reading the thread, I see consensus. Many people are in favor, there are some concerns. There are detailed posts trying to address those concerns. Mostly coming from two perspectives: overhead for existing contributor workflow, the other is about occasional contributors (more likely familiar with GitHub PR flow and unlikely to have commit access anyway). I think there’s rough consensus in favor. I’d like to understand if there’s a significant chance for the tooling that Nikita wants to not work? If we think it can work, not much reason to delay.
- Nikita: hard to say without trying it; I would really like to try it before making a decision. This could have been implemented a long time ago (RFC is up for months). No need to rush the decision now.
- Aaron: looking at it from the clang subcommunity perspective, I think the clang community was opposed, which was interesting. I don’t know if this is old-school contributors not willing to change their ways. We have only recently got pre-commit CI to work fast enough, and we did not re-enable some of the checks. Do we have headroom to increase CI workload by 15%?
- Petr: the short answer is yes, we recently had a bug where we lost half of the capacity but we haven’t seen any negative impact on latency. This indicates the system is currently overprovisioned. It is also designed to scale up and down if needed.
- Aaron: the other problem is email deluge. If you are automatically added to PRs that you normally wouldn’t need to review, this increases your review load.
- Vlad: we have enough capacity to test lldb on CI. I would also wait for the tooling and compare with existing workflows. It’s been 3 years since we’ve been promised to have tooling to cleanup user and revert branches, but it has not been delivered.
- Renato Golin: there’s a big difference between mandatory PRs and mandatory PR reviews. I understood it was only for mandatory PRs, not review. How do we say “do not review this”. The only value from mandatory PRs is that it’s now in the web interface. If a PR is merged immediately, it still shows up in my email, but I see it has been merged.
- Petr: Renato said want I wanted to say. We are discussing mandatory PRs, not mandatory reviews. If it encourages people to request reviews, I’d like that\!
- Aaron: I routinely have 400-500 of these per day. The signal-to-noise ratio is high. Maybe we shouldn’t auto-add people to review.
- Petr: can you send me an example where you get auto-added where you didn’t want to me.
- Alex: these are configurable through Github codeowners.
- Renato: if we start using tags, like `@dont-review`, then you can filter in your email. There is something we can do infrastructurally to help people who get a lot of these emails to help them filter.
- Aaron: I’m hesitant to rely on label because new contributors don’t know those. But new contributors wouldn’t be pushing to main directly. This goes to Nikita’s point on the tooling.
- Petr: it would be nice to know which tooling, I heard the script and the email flow. We would appreciate some feedback from people who have been using it. We’ve been through rounds of reviews, but nobody involved in the discussion is pushing to main directly. We don’t have good data on that PR.
- Nikita: it’s fine to merge it and then process the feedback. Also post in on the RFC thread because it’s not linked from anywhere.
- Aaron: I can’t run the script, it’s a bash script and I’m on Windows.
- Petr: it’s not our script. We have a separate one, which is a python script that should go into LLVM utils.
- Vlad: the RFC would help release managers to their job on their release branch, given that we are branching in mid-January. We should explicitly say whether this is happening or not…
- Petr: for release managers, we can give everyone exception to push to main and turn on the github option.
- **Action Item: Alex to make a draft and send around to project council**
- **Decision: hold Project Council meetings 2nd Wed of the month at 2pm ET for a regular cadence (next project council can update it if they want)**

# November 19, 2025

Meeting link: [meet.google.com/cyp-jxvf-kkb](https://meet.google.com/cyp-jxvf-kkb)

Notes:

- Reid (raised the issue to the project council): Contributors from Google want to add the SFrame feature. Fangrui (MaskRay) pointed out technical deficiencies and raised concerns about the cost of implementing and maintaining. There may be a pattern of proposals being blocked because of the maintenance cost. Should we clarify this at the policy level? Specifically, we have wording around being welcoming to new contributors/contributions.
- Aaron: do we have stats on the number of active contributors? If there are not enough maintainers, the pushback may be due to that.
- Reid: I did stats of `git log`,  in [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-sframe-support-to-llvm/86900/19?u=rnk](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-sframe-support-to-llvm/86900/19?u=rnk) and the maintainer/lead contributor is at \~340 commits vs 17 for the next.
- Peter: I actually worked on the ELF backend 5 years ago and am still in the list of major contributors. I have a stack of changes that were not landed over similar objections. The current major contributor is just pushing code directly to lld without PR and not necessarily review. The successful strategy has been to implement things in GNU ld first so then lld is made compatible with it. This kind of behavior also feels discouraging for new contributors. We’ve been pushing changes to other backends and the experience there was different. I asked the person in question about their behavior and they said there was nobody else to maintain, but maybe nobody dares.
- Alex: the maintainer list [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/lld/Maintainers.md](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/main/lld/Maintainers.md) doesn’t have Fangrui on it; has the contributor volunteered to main things.
- Sterling Augusting: I am the contributor of that and I volunteered to maintain to no avail.
- Reid: We can ask Arthur Eubanks if they wants to be a maintainer.
- Peter: Peter Smith from Arm and Daniel Thornburgh from Google.
- Aaron: What I’m hearing from the project council is that we have to update the maintainers list, which kind of gets us unstuck, and also in the scope of the project council. We can also add more maintainers to the smaller subprojects in a batch process.
- Alex: I’m not sure we can just nominate people, our role is to ensure the list is up to date, it’s the role of the lead maintainer.
- Aaron: there no being the lead maintainer is part of the problem. Is Fangrui de-facto the lead maintainer?
- Reid: de facto yes, he is the biggest contributor.
- Peter: Is there scope for an LLD area team? It will be then up to the contributors to elect members of that in the area team.
- David: It may hit the same problem as the mlir area team, and we may also not have enough volunteers.
- Peter: this goes back to the question of whether maintainers have the veto power.
- Alex:
- Aaron: my understanding was that maintainers are more privileged because they are trusted by the community. But a stronger voice doesn’t mean veto.
- Reid: In the last round, there was a discussion of who can block changes?
- Alex: I’d expect that the area team makes the decision, but there’s no area team there, so this is being escalated to the project council. We should step in and call if there is rough consensus or not.
- Aaron: maintainers can take of most of things and make decisions, only when they can’t or are challenged, the area team should step in.
- Petr: from me following the thread, it looks like there is consensus to have the feature.
- Alex: \[lists action items below\]
- Reid: What about the maintainers list?
- Aaron: we should at least install the lead maintainer
- Petr: it may not make sense because there is not much shared code. Can we find someone who is not attached to a particular backend?
- Aaron: This makes me want a lead maintainer even more so none of the backend outweighs all the others.
- Reid: just settling for multiple maintainers for each backend may be good enough to make progress.

—

- Petr: This is a follow-up from the previous meeting. The discussion is stalled, many people in favor and some opposed. We had a roundtable at the dev meeting. We are addressing concerns, e.g., about using PRs without changing the workflow drastically, guidelines on post-commit reviews. I’d really like a yes/no answer. This is not the first time we are having this discussion, I found an old RFC from Tom Stellard with a similar proposal that is also stalled.
- Alex: procedurally, we may want to decide without Petr who is also on the project council.
- Aaron: Was this discussed in the infrastructure area team.
- Petr: this was even in the platform we were running on for the area team election.
- Aaron: if the area team is unanimous on that, there’s no problem in Petr communicating that.
- Petr: I’d also like to get the result before the next project council so we don’t pass this on to them undecided.
- David: The hope is to have a motivated answer.
- Alex: If we don’t decide offline by the next meeting, we will start it with a vote.
- Reid: there will always be people who may be negatively affected, “disagree and commit”.

—

- The Clang area team decided to expand team size to 5 starting next year; we need to both grow leaders and share the workload better.
- Petr: Maybe each area team can have some sort of retrospective. Did you decide on 5 to avoid ties?
- Aaron: tie breaking. Though we didn’t have a case where we needed a tie breaker.
- Petr: are the project council decisions to create new teams or expand teams

- , are these decisions carried over to the next teams.
- Aaron: I think it makes sense to continue with the area teams.
- Reid: created area teams will keep operating.
- Petr: we never figured out the community team, should we try again for the next election cycle?
- Alex: What is the scope of the community team?
- David: better unify moderators and interact with CoC.
- Aaron: Let's put it on the next project council agenda.

Action Items:

- Put “maintainers don’t have the veto right” into a policy.
- Support updating the lld maintainers list
- [aaron.ballman@gmail.com](mailto:aaron.ballman@gmail.com)[Alex Zinenko](mailto:ftynse@gmail.com)[npopov@redhat.com](mailto:npopov@redhat.com)to read the [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-sframe-support-to-llvm/86900](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-sframe-support-to-llvm/86900) thread and conclude (offline) whether we see rough consensus; provide a motivated answer;
- project council: (re-)read the [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164) thread and decide whether we see rough consensus; provide a motivated answer.

Topics:

* [\[RFC\] Adding SFrame support to llvm](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-sframe-support-to-llvm/86900)
  * [Comment](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-adding-sframe-support-to-llvm/86900/26?u=rnk) explains that this is a disagreement between contributors and the lead maintainer, and that it should be escalated to the project council. Q for secretary, is this appropriate?
  * Reid: Most commenters agree the format has significant deficiencies, but what should our bar for excellence be for features as a project? LLVM/MLIR are full of niche extensions, and we usually try to find ways to work together to keep things maintainable. Should we have a coherent project policy encouraging maintainers to unblock contributors, seek compromise, welcome niche contributions, or should we maintain high standards of excellence, and use LLVM’s leverage to encourage contributors to aspire for more (in this instance, fully subsume .eh\_frame)?
  * There is a pattern of behavior here of blocking contributions due to concerns about maintenance cost and design simplicity.
    * ICF safe mislinks objects with ADRP/LDR instructions split across sections, [blocked PR](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/139493) from pranavk
    * Folks from Meta (Wenlei He & Alexander Yermolovich) have been unable to upstream patches for Buck support, relocation overflow warnings, and other functionality over similar grounds of technical complexity.
  * Possible outcome: Some statement that the project council feels that the LLD lead maintainer is being insufficiently open to new contributions, not “LLD should implement sframes”
    * Clearly, we expect maintainers to have high standards, and to push back against needless complexity. However, we expect maintainers to seek to grow the project, and delegate and share power when possible so we can sustain LLVM and its subprojects over the long term. LLVM is intended to be shared, open infrastructure for building HPC toolchains.
    * The values of openness and inclusivity are grounded in lots of aspirational text (the “shoulds”, not the “should nots”) in the [developer policy](https://llvm.org/docs/DeveloperPolicy.html) and [code of conduct](https://llvm.org/docs/CodeOfConduct.html).
* [RFC: Require Pull Requests for all llvm-project commits](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-require-pull-requests-for-all-llvm-project-commits/88164)
  * Discussed at the [LLVM Developers Meeting Round Table](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/operational-maturity-round-table-notes/88898).
  * The [script to use PRs over pushing to main](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/166473) is under review.
  * We're planning to publish guidelines for post-commit reviews.
  * Proposal: Remove the direct push exception on January 31\.
    * This should give us sufficient time to land all changes.
    * We don't want the RFC to slip into the next election cycle.
* FYI from Clang Area Team
  * [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/expanding-clang-area-team-size-to-5-in-2026/88896](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/expanding-clang-area-team-size-to-5-in-2026/88896)
  * Expanding to five people, starting next year
  * Doing so to help build up more leaders in the community, share the work around more

# October 1, 2025

Meeting link: [https://meet.google.com/jfk-mhmh-obx](https://meet.google.com/jfk-mhmh-obx)

Topics:

- RFC on requiring pull requests:
  - Petr: I posted the RFC but the whole infra team worked on. The project council may want to weigh in. There was a lot of support and some disagreement. Could be a good trial of the governance process.
  - Lucile Nihlen: I read through the concerns. Many of them are being addressed. The remaining one is an interconnect of two issues: (1) resentment of the past move from Phabricator to Github; people feel they previous concerns weren’t heard; (2) a slippery slope towards commit-blocking reviews. It is a valid concern. Google is under pressure to raise the bar for review practices in LLVM. In my discussions with various people about mandatory review, it seems that reviewers being oversubscribed is the main problem. If we required review for non-trivial changes, it could lead to reviewer burnout. We do need to be reviewing more code. We may want to change the review culture, and also have more Google engineers doing review if Google wants more review. Given Google’s footprint, how can we increase the amount of reviews they do. Maybe we can have more process about post-commit review to see if code is reviewed in timely fashion.
  - Petr: around the world, govts started looking seriously at software supply chain security, which is particularly important for companies that are govt suppliers. There is also regulatory pressure. This sometimes transpires as suggestions to stop funding LLVM development from companies. Google is not the only entity that feels this regulatory pressure, any major company may be in the same position. We need to start thinking about this now.
  - Nikita: I already wrote that on the RFC. We need to provide tooling that makes it easier to push changes through PRs. Without that, I can’t evaluate how much it will affect workflow.
  - Petr: I can try enabling this and give everyone a blanket exception. Then we can discuss about removing the exception.
  - Lucile: I talked privately with other vendors, and they may not be feeling the regulatory pressure, yet. Google lives close to LLVM HEAD, unlike many other companies, which increases pressure on them. If Google starts doing more reviews, maybe the next companies that feels the pressure will follow up. We may have a virtuous cycle in having companies contribute more thanks to that. Our security council says, more or less, there is a year or two to figure it out, otherwise make a hard fork.
  - Vlad Serebrenikov: clang maintainers mention that moving from Phabricator to Github decreased 2x their review bandwidth. Enabling mandatory review will inevitably lead to “two classes” of contributors.
  - Alex: \<\<\>\>\>
  - Nikita: from public perception, people seem to be more concerned with testing rather than code review. We often have buildbots that are broken regularly.
  - Petr: I tried to decouple the RFC from mandatory review, but the discussion keeps circling back to that. We already have a two-tier system for LLVM. There are things that become simpler thanks to github query interface.
  - Alex: That’s great, put that in the answer. This may show reviewers that they gain something from this change.
  - Vlad: Keep in mind that effects of policy changes will be seen in 10 years.
  - Reid: going back to how can we sell this to the community? We need data to show that the situation is improving. People may disagree, and the point of the project council is to break ties. I’ve been exploring off-the-shelf tools ([Grimoirelab](https://github.com/chaoss/grimoirelab/blob/main/README.md)) to measure time-to-review, but nothing shareable yet. [Example metrics for Eclips](https://eclipse.biterg.io/app/dashboards#/view/GitHub-Pull-Requests-Timing)
  - Nikita: Part of the problem is the benefits are not visible for an individual contributor, they are more visible at the project or company level. This creates a strange power disbalance.
  - Petr: It may not be immediately obvious.
  - Alex: can we have a blueprint for company folks to sell this internally.
  - Lucile: it may not be that hard, Google requires all internal code to be reviewed, it sounds reasonable to also mandate review of code we contribute and use.
  - Vlad: the timeline aspect is important. While we have infrastructure for PRs, people still make direct pushes. Why are people doing that? Out of habit or other reasons?
  - Petr: when we switched to Github, direct commits were \~50%, now they are at \~25%. The majority of them come from \<10 contributors. I’m not comfortable putting these contributors on the spot:
  - Vlad: do we understand why the amount of unapproved commits goes down?
  - Petr: combination of factors. We’ve seen some people switching to PRs. But there are also a lot of newcomers who predominantly use PRs.
  - Nikita: I started creating more PRs because I can get pre-merge testing.
  - Alex: let’s wrap up.
  - Petr: I plan on responding to the RFC with what is discussed.
  - Alex: my suggestion is to ask people for feedback and direct suggestions.
  - Petr: we can have a roundtable at the dev meeting as well.

- Developer meeting
  - Petr: we have a slot at the developer meeting for the updates from the project council, as recommended by the policy document. I was hoping that members of different area teams who are around can present.
  - Alex: we can send emails and ask who is around.

Action Items:

- Alex: figure out next project council meeting date and format
- Petr: contact area team members about the dev meeting slot
- Everyone: reconvene next time for the mandatory PR discussion.

# Agenda for Aug 20, 2025

Meeting link: [meet.google.com/urn-svym-psq](http://meet.google.com/urn-svym-psq)

Action Items from Last Meeting

* Petr: put together a PR as a stake-in-the-ground for getting governance documented more centrally
  * Not yet, out for the last while
  * Planning to reuse existing work to get it started, will likely also be reused for the LLVM Dev meeting
* Alex will send a poll for the next meeting and for a potential recurrent time slot.
  * Current time slot works for folks
  * Do we want to do it every month or every four weeks? Petr prefers a fixed schedule (every four weeks) as it makes for less conflicts for him
  * We’ll go with every four weeks (instead of monthly)
* Everyone: come up with a documentation consolidation RFC.
  * Still on the queue
  * Purpose is to clarify what policies are project-wide vs. per-subproject
  * Reid: How does this prioritize w.r.t. Clarifying governance (task \#1)?
  * Petr: Perhaps step 1 is creating a place for top-level project policy, then pulling llvm DeveloperPolicy text can be drawn in piecemeal. Points of divergence: code style, testing strategy, etc
  * Aligns with top-level cmake work (why do we configure builds with cmake ../llvm…)
  * Making a top-level dir typically requires an RFC. Would also want to decide on a URL. Where is this hosted? [llvm.org/docs](http://llvm.org/docs) is for llvm-project/llvm
  * Petr will do the RFC for the top-level directory, Reid will help
* Alex: communicate acceptance of the lighthouse project.
  * Done and the repository has been created: [https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse](https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse)
* Reid: Will draft additional developer policy text on tool-assisted generated contributions requiring. Contributors using tools to generate contributions, text or code, have an increased burden of proof to justify why their contribution is worth spending time reviewing. Project review resources are precious and scarce. Contributors are encouraged to label tool-generated contributions and provide justification why it is worth spending reviewer time on the proposal, issue, or code. Reviewers who suspect that a contribution is low-effort and low-value can respond by linking to this policy and asking the contributor to provide a stronger rationale for why the contribution justifies the effort to review the contribution. Repeated violations of this policy, such as by responding with the aid of tools, will result in escalating moderation actions, such as locking the thread or PR, and potentially escalating to a project ban.
  * [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/154441](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/154441) – posted yesterday (sorry for lack of lead time)
  * PR is under active discussion
  * Potential case study to try applying the new policy to: [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/154401](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/154401)
  * Non-native speakers are a valid use case; but that’s the user using a tool to translate their English into something better, but the kinds of AI contributions we want to avoid are ones where they used the AI to do the writing in the first place
  * A simple policy (no AI) is easier to execute, and simplicity matters to avoid wasting time.
  * What conversation do we want to have, an argument about whether AI was used, or an argument about the value of the contribution?
  * Reid will make some edits to the wording based on feedback during discussion and will post an RFC to discourse
* Project Council: figure out the criteria for lead maintainers. We also shouldn’t just block a nomination because “there is an objection”. Alex will draft an idea and share with the folks who were in the call for further input.
  * Tabling discussion until Alex is available
  * [What do we expect of a (lead) maintainer](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11xiMEBzottR6Wn0HSYOF3fy2XPpLAudJXaVYxiVqan4/edit?tab=t.0) (access restricted)

Agenda

* How can the community engage with the project council?
  * Currently have a way to tag the project council on Discord, Discourse, and GitHub 👍
  * Petr: this came up when giving an update on governance, there are differences between area teams. Clang Area team is private, others are open. Same with area team notes, some are read-only some not. Do we want to make them more uniform, or is this the kind of freedom we want for area teams? Same goes for project council. There’s also going to be a session at the dev meeting to gather feedback. That’s a good place to ask the community how they feel and what the pain points are.
  * Reid: is this a panel?
  * Petr: decided against a panel, we didn’t know who was going to attend. Tanya suggested putting it on the schedule as a special session, same way that foundation updates happen. Everyone from area teams and project council is encouraged to come onto the stage. There will be a few slides of overview, but leave most space for Q\&A.
  * Nikita: current status is Alex is creating discourse posts for project council meetings (pre-announced and meeting minutes). That seems like a fine approach to me. And our meetings are open, folks outside of the project council are attending already, which is good
  * Jacques: cannot DM the project council on Discourse which is a problem. But this is on the LLVM calendar so it’s announced and open. We’re already pretty visible. Once folks are more aware of how the project council works, they’ll be more likely to interact.
  * Reid: starting by fixing documentation will help
  * Petr: another option would be to create a Google Group for each and project council. Foundation has a way to support that.
  * Going to improve docs, get feedback from the developer meeting, and then decide what to do after that.
  * Petr: having the differences between area teams helps the community to decide what they like and don’t like, so the next groups (after elections) can react to that feedback
* Community-wide issues engaging outside of the community?
  * Bounds safety RFC is a good example; no way to communicate with any of the constituent groups directly, makes our participation really challenging
  * Should/could there be a bidirectional Discourse / email bridge?
  * LLVM PoV: Mostly self-contained. What about Rust? Actually, they don’t use mailing lists. Main contact point is github.
  * LLVM Foundation administration of mailman was unsustainable, unlikely to return. Google Groups are an option for a managed solution.
  * Fragmentation is another major concern.
  * Prior art: [generic-abi@googlegroups.com](mailto:generic-abi@googlegroups.com) , [libc-coord](https://www.openwall.com/lists/libc-coord/) (?) coordination point for libc impls, whatever happened to itanium cxxabi list ([https://github.com/itanium-cxx-abi/cxx-abi](https://github.com/itanium-cxx-abi/cxx-abi) so similar to Rust)
* 2026 area team election preparations
  * Tom set up Elekto last time
  * Should be brought up under infrastructure area team as well
  * Put on the next agenda, didn’t have time to discuss this time

#

# Agenda for July 17, 2025

Meeting link: [https://](https://meet.google.com/eva-vywf-fve)[meet.google.com/ojz-umdr-gfg](http://meet.google.com/ojz-umdr-gfg)

Action Items from Last Meeting

* Petr: put together a PR as a stake-in-the-ground for getting governance documented more centrally
* Alex will send a poll for the next meeting and for a potential recurrent time slot.
* Everyone: come up with a documentation consolidation RFC.

Agenda

* MLIR project lighthouse incubator request \- [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-mlir-project-lighthouse/86738](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-mlir-project-lighthouse/86738)
* MLIR lead maintainers PR request ([https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/146928\#issuecomment-3033013532](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/146928#issuecomment-3033013532))
* Revising the policy on AI contributions
* How can the community engage with the project council?

Notes:
MLIR project lighthouse

* Alex: MLIR lighthouse is an incubator project, looking to move into the project. There’s no frontend currently. This will have build time dependencies, may download things like torch to run tests. Not super clear how to integrate that with infrastructure. It’s similar in spirit to llvm-test-suite, but more MLIR focused. The request is whether we want that as an incubator project or not.
* Nikita: how do incubators work? Are they part of the monorepo?
* Alex: separate from monorepo; this will never be merged into the monorepo. But it’s an incubator project because it’s desired to have the lower tier of support.
* Petr: we’ve had two other proposals under the LLVM organization on github, similar to llvm-test-suite. One is llvm integration test suite, the other is for offloading test suite. In both cases, those were separated for the same reasons as lighthouse. Dependent on other tools; didn’t feel right to include them in the main repo. They were brought up on the infrastructure area team. One discussion point was whether it’s better to keep those as separate repos or should they be integrated into llvm-test-suite. In the end, we decided to keep them separate. One reason because llvm-test-suite is not the best place, it has a lot of technical debt. If we want an additional layer for subprojects, we would probably need to clean that repo up. The other reason is related to automation, those really work best on a per-repo granularity. These repos will have a specific set of maintainers and who has access to what in terms of permissions. Easier to do on a per-repo basis. A lot of overhead that’s not worth it. Lighthouse feels exactly like the other proposals. So I support this.
* Petr: incubator may be confusing because those are intended to be integrated, but in this case this is never going to be the case. Maybe just make it clear in other ways (README.md) rather than incubator.
* Aaron: I don’t have a strong opinion one way or another, but there is no reason not to support it. Does this mean we need a separate category for test suites that is not “incubator”.
* Petr: all existing projects have a “-test-suite” suffix.
* Nikita: is the incubator terminology to avoid making it blocking, so people are free to break it?
* Renato (proposer): yes. I just wanted to get requirements from somewhere and those spelled out for the incubator are good. So ignore the “incubator” part.
* Aaron: okay, so it looks like the community code of conduct, etc.
* Aaron: it looks like we have consensus on accepting it.

Revising AI Policy

- Aaron: traditionally, we looked into the amount of effort that was put into writing a proposal to evaluate its quality. With LLMs, there is no longer a signal that a lot of thought went into the text. Reviewers are upset that they have to spend time responding to every point. We may want to change the policy to discourage this kind of behavior, but we don’t want to entirely disallow it, for example, if it is used as an autocomplete or spellcheck. The current policy puts weight on the reviewer should call out if they think the submission was generated with an LLM, which makes it harder for the reviewer. We could consider asking the original poster to confirm it really reflects their thoughts.
  - Relevant links:
    - [Current policy](https://llvm.org/docs/DeveloperPolicy.html#ai-generated-contributions)
    - Alleged LLM-generated RFCs?
      - [https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-modern-c-alternative-to-tablegen-for-mlir-operation-definition/86800](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-modern-c-alternative-to-tablegen-for-mlir-operation-definition/86800) \- not alleged, the poster confirms they are using an LLM.
    - [New era of slop security reports](https://sethmlarson.dev/slop-security-reports)
    - [Alex Gaynor’s Claude-generated instcombine validated with Alive](https://simonwillison.net/2025/Jun/30/llvm/)
    - Clang review where contributor responded-by-LLM (TODO linkit)
    - [Rust policy](https://github.com/rust-lang/compiler-team/issues/893)
- Nikita: we had a similar discussion on Rust. There were PRs with typical LLM descriptions with bullet points that are long to say very little. There was a proposed policy to allow reviewers to reject obviously low-quality LLM-generated PR without addressing individual points. But there was opposition about making this specific about AI-generated rather than low-quality PRs in general, so it was decided to allow rejection for all such PRs, most of which are AI-generated.
- Petr: this is similar to the discussions we had at Google. There are other OSS projects taking a stronger stance on AI-generated content, up to completely rejecting. I don’t think these policies are going to stop people from sending AI-generating content. We shouldn’t spend time deciding whether the content was generated by AI, we could instead spend time to understand whether it is a good change or not. The main issue with AI content is the volume. That’s why we need a stricter policy that would give reviewers more power. Make it easier to reject contributions that are not providing any value. It shouldn’t be reviewer’s job to prove any value.
- Reid (drafted the existing policy on AI): when the policy was written, long-form LLMs were still on the horizon. We wanted to allow people to use Copilot, for example. I could spend more time on expanding the policy. Is this policy about AI-generated contributions? It should be broader. Contributors should advertise if they used a tool to generate the contribution. The bar for justification of that change would be higher. There is a precedent of an InstCombine change found/verified with Alive where the author disclosed that and explained why it is useful. SUch a policy would become a tool that reviewers could use with low effort, and ask the poster to
- Alex: it should not be restricted to either AI tools or PRs specifically, there was an RFC on MLIR that took several senior reviewer that the person was ptosting AI generated content verbatim. It wasn’t even clear the person was going to do the work. Being able to say “we’re not engaging with this” would be a good core of the policy. The burden of proof should be on the person using the tool. It’s about proportionality of effort between proposer and reviewer.
- Renato: if the problem is the amount of work we spent reviewing the change as opposed to creating it. If we had a tag saying “needs more work convincing the community that it is a useful change”
- Alex: we should be conscious of potential abuse of that; people can put a label on something as a way to stall it.
- Petr: what is the threshold for applying such a label? There is a spectrum between verbatim AI output and something like spellchecking.
- Reid: I don’t have an answer to the above, but the labeling/abuse question is about implementation. We can first define the policy, what we expect from the contributors.
- Aaron: our review bandwidth is one of the most precious resources. I’d like the policy to be favorable to reviewers to make a judgement call to say “I’m not reviewing this because \<policy-link\>”. The alternative would be for changes to be ignored.
- Alex: it’s also okay if one reviewer says they don’t want to review it by somebody else does.
- Aaron: our commit policy is a bit relaxed, but we will have to see with actual examples.
- Petr: do we want/have a stance on AI-assisted code reviews?
- Aaron: in our experience in clang, most of the suggestions are irrelevant or wrong with, e.g., coding style.
- Alex: similar experience in mlir.
- Idea: we can have the first-commit “welcome” message bot say it is not advisable to add co-pilot.
- Petr: I was thinking about a larger scale thing with reviews, like taking an entire PR, feeding it to an LLM and posting back the review.
- Alex: I think a review is a contribution.
- Aaron: this is also my opinion.

MLIR lead maintainers discussion

- Alex: we had a process to come up with a list of lead maintainers, asked the community to volunteer privately so people would not self-censor. We came up with a list of nominations for lead maintainers, submitted a first PR with the list we decided to nominate, which happens to be the same folks on the area team (not intentionally, just the way it worked out). We had someone raise concerns about the process by which we came up with the nomination, and they had a concern about a particular nomination. They didn’t want to single out the person they are concerned about. So the PR is currently blocked. I would like to get out of the project council how to proceed with this. It’s a bit outside of the existing policies because this is a new project.
- Mehdi (raised objections to the nomination PR): it’s the first time we nominate lead maintainers for MLIR, so there’s not a lot of precedent to lean on. The lack of criteria makes it hard to consider what is or isn’t a suitable person for the role. From the process point of view, having a list of nominations does not make it easy to address. Having individual PRs would be helpful for making progress. There’s a question of what do we expect from lead maintainers, what qualifies someone. Not saying we need strict thresholds in terms of engagement, but how do we recognize the right people for the role. With code owners, we often nominated people already doing the work. I brought some thoughts in the PR as a comment, but those are just my views.
- Aaron: there are two different things and we’d like to keep them somewhat separate. (1) we have an existing policy and an existing PR, what to do with it? (2) Should we change the policy to address it?  Regarding (1), I took a look, and it looks like the people nominated seem to be active on PRs, discourse, chats. Barring specific concerns one can defend against, I don’t see why we shouldn’t be moving forward with this. I don’t know if there is anything concrete?
- Mehdi: we need to establish criteria. You looked at PR comments, discourse, but there is also code. What if somebody only contributed to a niche part of the project?
- Aaron: I can clarify: multiple people are nominated so I don’t see why every single of them needs to have expertise across the entirety of the overall project. The important part is if they are willing to do the work required of the lead maintainer, including learning things about areas they don’t know yet, help other people. All these folks have been around for a while and know how to redirect the questions. They just need the ability to direct people to the right source.
- Nikita: the mlir situation is a bit different from other projects, and the proposed list of maintainers already has a hierarchy with additional categories. If it comes to people who are primarily involved in one area specifically, they should be on that category. I agree with Mehdi that they should not be the lead maintainer. But I am lacking specifics on objections. The point about nominating multiple people at once, this is not necessarily a problem. We have precedent on LLVM with backend nominations. I don’t think it makes sense to nominate a series of 4 PRs so people can comment on that. Maybe it’s different for lead maintainers, but generally I would not require that.
- Mehdi: you may be blocking the entire process because of one person.
- Aaron: you can always request to split one person off, this is no different from code PRs where things can be split. The bigger concern is, if there is an objection, this is really awkward and we don’t want to create a tension for people to work together. However, if the objection is not available, there is no way to defend against that or for the community to participate.
- Reid: what’s the alternative to the PR on the table?
- Mehdi: do we need to have four names?
- Reid: we do want redundancy and backup. We ended up with area teams so there is some redundancy. Four seems better than one or zero.
- Alex: there is a longer proposal; there’s four folks for lead maintainer, but there’s more hierarchy. We just didn’t want to try to do the entire list at once. The idea was to get the lead maintainers first, then that group will discuss the other maintainers
- Renato (nominated in the PR): clang and llvm both had an RFC on discourse with a whole list, but it takes a long time. Might not be a good idea. But it’s even more people so the process may take longer, but if it unblocks the PR, that’s good.
- Petr: even with separate PRs, the question is whether people will be willing to raise those objections on the PR. It seems right now the answer is no. So does breaking it up solve that? Or do we need an alternative mechanism for objections? The only alternative way I can think of are elections.
- Aaron: regarding elections, since the people nominated are also elected to the area team, are we getting any new information?
- Mehdi: I don’t know what is the role of the lead maintainer so I cannot object because of that.
- Aaron: we actually have a description in the policy. The point is that people are volunteering to do a lot of thankless work. And by getting too prescriptive about the role, we can make people not volunteer at all. We don’t want that. Maintainers were supposed to be a lightweight thing that people can come and go, and pick up again.
- Nikita: can we table this until next time but get the community unblocked by nominating the non-lead maintainers.
- Alex: are there any action items here? For the project council to think about the lead maintainer role?
- Aaron: We can try making the responsibilities clearer, but we also ensure a vague objection cannot block the process.
- Mehdi: I think we should come up with the criteria first. I chose not to quantify my objections because I don’t know what the criteria are.
- Renato: I agree that we should come up with the criteria.
- Reid: to restate, Mehdi would like to have criteria emphasizing past contributions and Aaron would like criteria about willingness to do the work of routing reviews, issue triage. Is that an accurate description?
- Aaron: I can clarify my point. I agree with Mehdi that we do need criteria, and I do think technical contributions are a part of those. My point on objections is that we are a community of 1000 people, we cannot be unanimous on anything.
- Alex: it looks like there is a violent agreement on the fact that we need to establish criteria. I suggest the project council to work on that and come up with an RFC.
- Jacques: lead maintainer is not a position of power, Aaron mentioned that. We should maybe make it clear in the documentation.

Action Items:

- Alex: communicate acceptance of the lighthouse project.
- Reid: Will draft additional developer policy text on tool-assisted generated contributions requiring. Contributors using tools to generate contributions, text or code, have an increased burden of proof to justify why their contribution is worth spending time reviewing. Project review resources are precious and scarce. Contributors are encouraged to label tool-generated contributions and provide justification why it is worth spending reviewer time on the proposal, issue, or code. Reviewers who suspect that a contribution is low-effort and low-value can respond by linking to this policy and asking the contributor to provide a stronger rationale for why the contribution justifies the effort to review the contribution. Repeated violations of this policy, such as by responding with the aid of tools, will result in escalating moderation actions, such as locking the thread or PR, and potentially escalating to a project ban.
- Project Council: figure out the criteria for lead maintainers. We also shouldn’t just block a nomination because “there is an objection”. Alex will draft an idea and share with the folks who were in the call for further input.
- Alex: schedule next project council meeting.

#

# Agenda for Jun 13, 2025

Meeting link: [https://meet.google.com/eva-vywf-fve](https://meet.google.com/eva-vywf-fve)

Action Items from Last Meeting

* Aaron: reach out to Anton/Tom/Tanya to set up a Group on Discourse and a Team on GitHub for the area teams and for the project council
  * Done
* Aaron will invite Chris B to the next project council meeting
  * Done
* Alex will send a poll for the next meeting and for a potential recurrent time slot.
  * Done
* Petr: put together a PR as a stake-in-the-ground for getting governance documented more centrally
  * Still working on it

Agenda

* Who is the project council’s liaison to the LLVM Foundation?
  * We can pick someone, but how does it work? Is that person an observer, or can they add items to the foundation’s agenda? Does the foundation need a vote in the project council? Does the project council need a vote in the foundation? Does the liaison need to provide a report to the foundation every month?
* Who is the project council chair?
  * Aaron
* Who is the project council secretary?
  * Alex
* Any RFCs we think we should look at?
* Maintainers for MLIR (we have a tentative plan)
* Policy wrt AI-generated content

Action Items:

* Alex will send a poll for the next meeting and for a potential recurrent time slot.
- Petr: put together a PR as a stake-in-the-ground for getting governance documented more centrally
- Everyone: come up with a documentation consolidation RFC.

Notes

- Aaron: Unclear how to set up email filters to see @-mentions of the project council / area teams.
- Aaron: Liaison between the project council and the foundation?
- Chris: Foundation is making changes to how its board operates: monthly meetings are not effective, the most important part is voting and that is about the mechanics of running the foundation as an entity.
- Chris: Trying to move to a subcommittees model, subcommittees produce recommendations and give them to the board.
  - Finance subcommittee
  - (Foundation) governance, e.g., bylaws
  - Legal subcommittee, e.g., licensing
  - TBD: “bridge” subcommittee for the community and its governance
- Chris: Expecting needs/requests from the community governance, e.g., project council, in particular finance and legal is where the foundation can operate.
- Chris: We would want subcommittees to have a board member on them
  - Community providing feedback for subcommittee mechanics
- Aaron: does the foundation want to send somebody to the project council? Looks like we can agree about that in a subcommittee.
- Chris: the foundation shouldn’t be putting weight on community governance.
  - The foundation is also set up to avoid corporate pressure.
  - The foundation members are not necessarily doing the day-to-day work in the community, at least not anymore.
- Aaron: I was thinking more about the foundation communicating to us, e.g., decisions from the board meeting.
- Chris: The important part is to establish communication between the community, the area teams, the project councils and the board, and potentially its subcommittees.
- Alex: Any specific mandates for this council?
- Chris: Not pushing any specific items, it’s part of the job to figure out the governance model. Streamline decision-making.
- Aaron: paraphrasing “this is a change for the community to make its own decisions instead of having the foundation make it for the community”.
- Chris: it’s moving from a more authoritarian model where some individuals would steer the decisions.

---

- Chris: the foundation lost access to some documents on google docs, so we are now considering using github as source of truth. Other governance bodies, e.g. Rust, have their minutes and decisions published to a github repository. It also allows one to use github issues to track action items. Is this something the project council considered as well?
- Petr: we have discussed that in some aspects. Not necessarily about meeting minutes, but we did discuss this for RFCs, in particular, using it to indicate decisions or action items on those. Github is also getting more functionality, it now has “discussions” that may be replacing discourse. Carbon moved there, for example, as it offers better integration with code. We can explore this.
- Aaron: I agree this is a good idea, I’m worried about the amount of stuff on google docs, but also about putting everything into one basket.
- Alex: there’s also a difference between git repository and github issues/discussions. Ideally, we’d have some sort of backup to a proper git repository.
- We can also discuss with github about better support. The risk of github going away completely is low, but doesn’t preclude having backups.
- Nikita: Rust community used to store meeting minutes in git, but they found that too much of a hassle. They are now using hackmd.
- Aaron: are they still doing RFC through github?
- Nikita: they do. It’s different for meeting minutes because there is no discussion.
- Aaron: we started just posting minutes on discourse.
- Petr: We will have to figure this out. Things are currently spread out between llvm-www, discourse, blog, etc…
- Aaron: this prompted me to look at whether the clang blog is still available.
- Chris: the foundation was discussing how to bring more blog posts because it helps promote the project. It’s one of the more community-focused things the foundation is interested in but does not have resources to do. The project council may be able to help with this.
- Chris: we need a top-level docs repo, split from llvm. Maybe we can get a GSoC.
- Petr: we had a person doing that for the website, but it is currently in limbo. That’s a GSoC problem if it’s not done within the scope.
- Chris: I like how the LLVM website is just plain old HTML, but it may be easier to use a static website generator from markdown.
- Petr: Some people think it’s not good enough.
- Alex: MLIR has been using markdown for a while. If needed, we can copy mlir-www to llvm-www and see.
- Alex: Maybe we should hire a professional web designer to do that?
- Chris: the foundation cannot accept donations directed specifically at the website, it must be unrestricted. It requires a significantly more complex legal setup.
- Aaron: We as a project council are probably the correct level to come up with a plan to consolidate the documentation.
- Chris: the foundation board has talked a lot about fragmentation in the community, different parts behaving wildly differently from each other. Hopefully the project council can set up good standards for everyone. Technically, we were reluctant to move docs from reStructuredText, but maybe the council can recommend, for example, that all new docs are written in markdown because it seems like the future.
- Petr: I’m generally interested in the separation of responsibilities. The infrastructure team was asked for more communication channels (discourse, discord, etc.), but neither the team nor the council has admin system permissions to do that. It may be managed by the foundation because it ultimately pays for them. Usually, the person who set it up is still doing admin work for that. If we spend time on defining roles and responsibilities, it will be time well spent.
- Chris: I’d love the project council to help with this. Initially, I envisioned the community area team that would take over moderation. We have a code of conduct committee, which is not part of the board though people were pulled into it by the board. The committee is resolving most issues, but some get escalated to the board when disciplinary action is needed like banning someone from events or disallowing them to contribute. The committee makes a recommendation and the foundation ratifies it so the legal responsibility lies with the foundation. This is intentional so the individual contributors or contributing corporations are not liable. We need the community to select moderators and code of conduct members, but the legal aspect is better off with the foundation.
- Petr: we currently have people who are admins but don’t necessarily know how to use the tools, they are just helping at the best of their capability. We may have people in the community who may be better suited to do this.

---

- Alex: I nominate Aaron as a chair and myself as secretary based on speaking and writing time.
- Aaron: I accept the nomination.
- Petr: I support the nominations
- Nikita: I support the nominations.

---

- Alex: MLIR area team has been working on nominating maintainers for the project. We don’t feel like one lead maintainer is reasonable given the pace of change, so we want to have four. The policy allows this, but I wanted to run this with the council.
- Aaron: No problem for me. Originally, we had a single lead maintainer policy to avoid maintainers disagreeing. We relaxed it several years ago and there were no problems. It also makes sense organizationally, e.g., if the lead maintainer needs to be absent for an extended period of time.
- Petr: It’s a good point about handling absence and workload.
- Nikita: I don’t have objections to that either.

---

- Alex: MLIR has gotten its first AI-written RFC, so I wanted to flag that as something to discuss and find a policy, in particular with respect to copyright / licensing. We may need foundation help on this from the legal perspective.
- Nikita: the developer policy has a paragraph about that: [https://llvm.org/docs/DeveloperPolicy.html\#ai-generated-contributions](https://llvm.org/docs/DeveloperPolicy.html#ai-generated-contributions). We accept such contributions but the responsibility lies with the contributor to ensure the code can be used under the appropriate license.
- Chris: We have discussed this at board meetings. The current policy is a reflection of a fact that we realistically cannot tell, at least for small contributions, whether or not it was AI-generated, and it is unreasonable to expect the reviewers or maintainers to carry the burden of verifying. Please send an email to the board if you want to discuss more\!
- Aaron: The only reasonable policy we can currently have is to disallow any AI contribution entirely.
- Petr: There is a lot of push on using more and more AI assistance in producing code, especially in large companies that have their own models. But it is unclear whether the code produced that way is compatible with licenses.
- Discussion to be picked up next time.

# Agenda for May 06, 2025

Meeting link: [https://meet.google.com/eva-vywf-fve](https://meet.google.com/eva-vywf-fve)

Action Items from Last Meeting

* Aaron: reach out to Anton/Tom/Tanya to set up a Group on Discourse and a Team on GitHub for the area teams and for the project council
  * Started but not completed due to EuroLLVM, will follow-up
* Petr: put together a PR as a stake-in-the-ground for getting governance documented more centrally
  * Started but still needs some additional work, hope to be done soon

Agenda

* Who is the project council chair?
* Who is the project council secretary?
* Who is the project council’s liaison to the LLVM Foundation?
* Any RFCs we think we should look at?
* Schedule next meeting
* Alex: clangIR may want to be an area

# Minutes

* Aaron: we need to pick officer positions at some point, chair secretary and liaison
* Alex: talked at EuroLLVM with Foundation board members about project council and maybe we should pull in Chris B and Reid K to help explain the intent behind the liaison with the LLVM Foundation, who should send whom to where.
* Aaron: reached out to Anton, we currently have Discord groups, will ping again regarding Discourse and GitHub.
* Petr: we are sticking with 3 area team members for the infrastructure area team, do we need to help other teams with growing?
* Alex: MLIR team has four, but some problems with split votes are possible (but haven’t been a problem so far)
* Petr: primary concern for us is ensuring we have consensus within the community, rather than a unilateral decision-making process.
* Petr: hot topic that comes up frequently is operational maturity within LLVM. Lots of people coming in to infrastructure area team meetings; a lot of push for improvements (especially regarding code reviews, pull requests and direct push, etc). Infra team is aligned on where to go in the long run regarding direct pushes, trying to get to every change requires a code review. But everyone on board in the infra team does not necessarily mean everyone in the community agrees. Can we just make that change unilaterally? I don’t think so. So what is the process?
* Alex: we as the project council can send an RFC and see what the response is. We’re not required to have unanimous consent, just [rough consensus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rough_consensus), according to the governance documents we have currently.
* Petr: there’s a lot of strong opinions in the community, it would be helpful to better understand people’s reasons why they’re opposed to the changes. Would it be possible to hear from all area teams whether their team would be in favor? And if not, what the concrete concerns are?
* Alex: not mutually exclusive processes; we could go to area teams first, but there are parts of the project not covered by an area team. Sometimes, restating the various options/opinions in a thread can help reduce the amount of contention.
* Aaron: invite people with the strongest opinions to a meeting so they can discuss. Oftentimes, we talk past each other in writing, which is not necessarily a problem with a call. Find a time that works for people with the strongest opinion
* Petr: make sure it doesn’t turn into a shouting match.
* Aaron: I can do a reasonable job in keeping people on topic. We can remind people the meeting is governed by the LLVM Code of Conduct.
* Alex: people tend to have a negative bias from reading material rather than oral communication, so holding a meeting may end up having less heat just because of the venue.
* Aaron: we don’t have an RFC yet, so may not be actionable.
* Petr: we have discussed this in the team: should we just start it or collect more data first? We are specifically thinking about post-commit reviews. Maybe just requiring PRs first without mandatory review, this makes it easier to find even post-commit reviews. There are some people that still had concerns about the friction of creating a PR. Can we make it as easy as pushing?
* Aaron: data gathering is not necessarily a precondition for an RFC. It’s up to the Infrastructure group to decide how much data they need. It might help getting the numbers of how many commits are going to be affected.
* Petr: it’s 20-40% changes that are going in.
* Alex and Arron: that’s surprising.
* Petr: that’s why security people at Google are losing sleep.
* Aaron: is this specific to a directory?
* Petr: looks more like certain contributors, but it isn’t uniformly distributed. There are also special cases like bazel changes or bot commits. E.g., most changes into lld are not reviewed. When we brought it up with maintainers, the answer was that there were no relevant reviewers except the author. And there’s no area team for lld.
* Aaron: we perennially have a problem of not enough reviewers.
* Petr: this often comes up as a concern – people struggle with the review load. Not doing a review is not a solution\!
* Aaron: maybe not having reviews may be indicative of the community not caring enough. The problem is likely the high rate of incoming change.
* Alex: MLIR folks are looking to be more aggressive with removing unmaintained code. This helps get new maintainers from downstreams who rely on that functionality.
* Petr: Aaron, have you considered being more proactive about removing unused functionality?
* Aaron: I’ve been pushing for removing stuff, and we were occasionally successful. E.g., ARC migration code. Flags are harder because people may be using them in private codebases, and we don’t have any telemetry.
* Petr: it would be great to have telemetry, but probably contentious.
* Petr: we may talk about it in the infrastructure group. For example, having a special build that has telemetry and we kindly ask people to use it.
* Aaron: other open-source projects did it with good explanation and a clear opting out. We may end up just having a cmake flag.
* Petr: a subteam at Google is working on a tool called [Cobalt](https://fuchsia.googlesource.com/cobalt/) for differential privacy telemetry.
* Aaron: there are also technical problems with clang, like the sheer amount of files that may be compiled. It is also a communication exercise to users.
* Aaron: re RFC, does the Infra team drive that or the Project Council?
* Petr: I’m okay with the Infra team driving this. We want to both outline the long-term vision but make clear it may take years. Identify milestones and describe their value. The first is requiring PRs for all the changes going in. What is the best way of collecting feedback? We will come to the project Council when we decide to take action. I don’t expect that we will get everybody on board.
* Aaron: we will step in to calm people and ensure a productive discussion.

---

* Aaron: someone asking if PSTL can be deleted?
* Petr: there are other directories like that, not being actively used, like libc/aor that was dropped by ARM. Nobody is willing to delete it. Re PSTL, we can check in the next C++ monthly.
* Aaron: I checked with Intel and they need it. They think libstdc++ may be vendoring it, and libc++ may be upset if that gets removed.
* Aaron: we need a better communication mechanism with our downstreams.
* Petr: the way it works for C++ is to have a dedicated team (vendors) that interested parties can join, and that group gets added to breaking changes. We also have clang-vendors, we may do that for all major groups / area.
* Aaron: we can @-mention the group, but not add it as a reviewer.

---

* Petr: we don’t have a good mechanism to conclude an RFCs. Maybe start using PRs.
* Aaron: we need community buy-in, but can float that as an idea. On clang side, I’m editing the RFC to add a link to the comment saying consensus was found or not. Not everybody has the ability to do that.
* Alex: we are trying to have the area team comment on the state and the next steps.
* Aaron: we also do that, probably the most important part.

---

* Aaron: no strong opinion for or against a CIR team.
* Petr: looking through the governance documents, the responsibility of the area team is nominating maintainers and reviewing RFCs. Are there enough RFCs?
* Nikita: do they have any decisions they need to make on the CIR team?
* Aaron: we are waiting for them to contribute enough stuff to Clang, which they are close to, before giving them maintainership of the project.
* Alex: so it may be a bit premature for a full area team, but we want to ensure discoverability of the working group.
* Nikita: adding them as maintainers is likely a good step for that.

Action Items

* Aaron will invite Chris B to the next project council meeting
* ~~Alex will send a poll for the next meeting and for a potential recurrent time slot.~~


# Agenda for Apr 03, 2025

Meeting link: [https://meet.google.com/pzs-sngz-mpk](https://meet.google.com/pzs-sngz-mpk)

Action Items from Last Meeting

* None

Agenda

* Quick hellos/introductions
* How do we want to add things to our agenda?
  * How to track RFCs? GitHub projects/issues?
* How do we want to handle RFCs that have no area team coverage?
* What amount of time do we want to spend each month on meetings?
* How to communicate back with the community
  * What kind of improved documentation is needed for area teams?
* When's our next meeting?

Minutes

* Aaron: Clang area team is largely about avoiding making decisions but instead getting the right people into meetings to discuss concerns to the point where the next steps are obvious.
* Alex: MLIR largely works the same way, have had good success splitting topics up into other groups. Once there’s no way to reach consensus, then we can discuss how to handle it, but hopefully that never comes up.
* Petr: one issue we’ve had so far is getting people to show up to the meeting. In terms of doing the work, the folks on the Google side have been attending regularly. So far it hasn’t been an issue. We have multiple infrastructures (buildbot, green dragon, GitHub action runners, self-hosted runners); everything has different admins, different owners. One contention can be around capacity – if we want to do that, \*how\* does it work? Can we just give someone money? We don’t have the answers. But it’s not clear if the infra team is the one to solve that (might not even be in the mandate)
* Aaron: how are we tracking RFCs across area teams?
* Petr: currently using a Google Doc for meetings, checking Discourse and GitHub and getting them on an agenda. It’s a bit manual, but is working. So far meeting minutes are kept in the doc, but should we be posting them elsewhere?
* Aaron: we also use Google Doc for meeting minutes and it lets us control visibility. But Clang gets a lot of RFCs and we cannot realistically process all of them. We are also considering Github projects for keeping track of RFCs. We might not need the same thing for the Project council as it is likely getting less RFCs worth of its attention.
* Alex: MLIR only gets 1-2 a week and have a lot of offline discussion, so not as many as on the Clang side. Bigger problem are that originally submitter for the RFC just sort of disappear. We haven’t figure out how to address the problem where people show up, folks have feedback, and the authors don’t respond. GitHub projects sound reasonable. It would be helpful to collect information about how many abandoned RFC exist. We have a fair amount of RFCs from first-time contributors who don’t always have their expectations set appropriately.
* Aaron: we really need to document things better, in particular about processes. Eventually, we’d like to get to a point where we can tell people “you’ll get feedback on the RFC within N weeks”.
* Petr: we can look at Carbon and their experience. They do everything on Github via PRs. There are no additional tools available on Discourse like labels. There may be pushback.
* Aaron: my personal opinion is that we should switch to a more formal process, but it is going to be a hard sell in this community. There’s a tension between being open and welcoming community and processes for production quality software. Someone will have to write an RFCs. Do we want RFCs from the Council as a whole.
* Petr: having consensus ahead is helpful.
* Alex: a more formal process can be offset by also clarifying what we think needs and RFC and what can just be a regular PR that doesn’t require as much process. It’s not currently clear. It does add some friction, but makes it clear we don’t always need that friction which hopefully addresses some community push back. MLIR found that having multiple coauthors on a more contentious RFC helps to mitigate community concerns as well.
* Aaron: everything is currently documented for LLVM, but it is unclear whether it applies to the whole community. THe status quo is that not everyone is following the rest of that, e.g., coding standards. E.g. libc++ cannot follow LLVM coding standards because STL. We need to document how and when projects diverge from common policies.
* Petr: we are overdue for lifting some of the original LLVM policy decisions. We haven’t fully taken advantage of the Github monorepo, except for some small parts shared by projects. We can define guidelines at the top level and let subprojects opt out of certain things or redefine them.
* Aaron: this is consistent with the feedback I have from folks. In particular, where to put this documentation: does this belong to the website? Repository?
* Petr: maybe nobody wanted to take the initiative.
* Aaron: decision-making around community-wide policy changes is a burn-out factor. With the Project Council, we may have more authority and a draw for people to contribute meaningful.
* Petr: for a lot of large-scale RFCs, a majority would remain silent likely implying agreement, but a vocal minority could make the RFC die from a lot of arguing. Maybe having a Project Council member step in and publicly support could make people show their support.
* Aaron: we don’t want to get the community post RFCs yet, this requires buy-in. But for ourselves, we can start using Github to track the status of RFCs. Not for any RFCs, but for those where we think we need to get involved or somebody explicitly asked for it.
* Alex: what are the rules of engagement, how do people reach out to us?
* Aaron: e.g., there’s an explicit question if an RFC is accepted or not without somebody clearly saying it is, people can ping us directly on Discourse. Another option is area team escalating. And finally for projects that don’t have an area team. Initially, we may want to be more proactive and asking if people need help. In clang, if we see an RFC needing attention, we leave a comment saying the area team will schedule a meeting to discuss it.
* Discourse has groups: [https://discourse.llvm.org/g](https://discourse.llvm.org/g) that can be @-mentioned.
* Aaron: how frequently do we want to meet and for how long?
* Alex: should be flexible, we don’t know how much work we have
* Aaron: one Clang side, we sometimes need several meetings per topic.
* Petr: aim for one meeting a month for right now, see where to go from there
* Aaron: in Clang area team, we have a public meeting on a specific RFC and then a private meeting of the area team discussing next steps and administrative discussions.
* Alex: we do something similar but not necessarily via a meeting (can use Discord DMs, group chat, etc). Depends a bit on the topic though. Maybe have an hour schedule, 45 minutes of community discussion and then kick folks out for the last 15 minutes of closed discussion.
* Petr: infrastructure has all been public, but we’ll use a private channel on discord for ad hoc (or one-off meetings). Haven’t needed to take things private currently. Don’t have enough data to know what the “right” approach is.
* Nikita: how do people reach out to the project council?
* Aaron: we will have a Discourse group.
* Nikita: and if it is on PRs?
* Aaron: we can also have a Github group.
* Petr: should we update the docs for governance specifically? Maybe under our existing documentation directory? The current governance stuff is currently a .md file in the www repo, it would be nice to update to put in a more central location.
* Room: this is a great idea\!
* Aaron: if it is on the website, we likely want it in one place with the Project Council and all Area teams.
* Petr: it would be helpful to have on the website.
* Aaron: similar to how the LLVM Foundation puts their meetings on the website.
* Petr: should we have `llvm-project/docs` instead of `llvm-project/llvm/docs`? Otherwise it may be confusing. It goes back to a discussion from the above.
* Aaron: initially, let’s stick to what is most convenient. Ultimately, I’d like to see a reorganization of all this stuff in the repo. It would be nice to have a central location for all (sub-)community discussions.
* Petr: we can also put it into `llvm-www`.
* Nikita: It’s annoying because one has to write HTML.
* Petr: let’s put it in the LLVM docs for simplicity and availability.

Decisions Reached

* Will add a new Project for the project council, will add one issue per RFC the project council takes
* Will need to document this eventually, but initial steps to get things on our plate is either tag the group in Discourse or we’ll grab it manually by leaving a comment
* Will have meetings in open, if private discussion is needed, that will be handled ad hoc.

Action Items

- [ ] Aaron: reach out to Anton/Tom/Tanya to set up a Group on Discourse and a Team on GitHub for the area teams and for the project council
- [ ] Petr: put together a PR as a stake-in-the-ground for getting governance documented more centrally
- [x] ~~Alex: set up a poll to determine when our next meeting is~~
- from the board meeting.
- Chris: The important part is to establish communication between the community, the area teams, the project councils and the board, and potentially its subcommittees.
- Alex: Any specific mandates for this council?
- Chris: Not pushing any specific items, it’s part of the job to figure out the governance model. Streamline decision-making.
- Aaron: paraphrasing “this is a change for the community to make its own decisions instead of having the foundation make it for the community”.
- Chris: it’s moving from a more authoritarian model where some individuals would steer the decisions.

---

- Chris: the foundation lost access to some documents on google docs, so we are now considering using github as source of truth. Other governance bodies, e.g. Rust, have their minutes and decisions published to a github repository. It also allows one to use github issues to track action items. Is this something the project council considered as well?
- Petr: we have discussed that in some aspects. Not necessarily about meeting minutes, but we did discuss this for RFCs, in particular, using it to indicate decisions or action items on those. Github is also getting more functionality, it now has “discussions” that may be replacing discourse. Carbon moved there, for example, as it offers better integration with code. We can explore this.
- Aaron: I agree this is a good idea, I’m worried about the amount of stuff on google docs, but also about putting everything into one basket.
- Alex: there’s also a difference between git repository and github issues/discussions. Ideally, we’d have some sort of backup to a proper git repository.
- We can also discuss with github about better support. The risk of github going away completely is low, but doesn’t preclude having backups.
- Nikita: Rust community used to store meeting minutes in git, but they found that too much of a hassle. They are now using hackmd.
- Aaron: are they still doing RFC through github?
- Nikita: they do. It’s different for meeting minutes because there is no discussion.
- Aaron: we started just posting minutes on discourse.
- Petr: We will have to figure this out. Things are currently spread out between llvm-www, discourse, blog, etc…
- Aaron: this prompted me to look at whether the clang blog is still available.
- Chris: the foundation was discussing how to bring more blog posts because it helps promote the project. It’s one of the more community-focused things the foundation is interested in but does not have resources to do. The project council may be able to help with this.
- Chris: we need a top-level docs repo, split from llvm. Maybe we can get a GSoC.
- Petr: we had a person doing that for the website, but it is currently in limbo. That’s a GSoC problem if it’s not done within the scope.
- Chris: I like how the LLVM website is just plain old HTML, but it may be easier to use a static website generator from markdown.
- Petr: Some people think it’s not good enough.
- Alex: MLIR has been using markdown for a while. If needed, we can copy mlir-www to llvm-www and see.
- Alex: Maybe we should hire a professional web designer to do that?
- Chris: the foundation cannot accept donations directed specifically at the website, it must be unrestricted. It requires a significantly more complex legal setup.
- Aaron: We as a project council are probably the correct level to come up with a plan to consolidate the documentation.
- Chris: the foundation board has talked a lot about fragmentation in the community, different parts behaving wildly differently from each other. Hopefully the project council can set up good standards for everyone. Technically, we were reluctant to move docs from reStructuredText, but maybe the council can recommend, for example, that all new docs are written in markdown because it seems like the future.
- Petr: I’m generally interested in the separation of responsibilities. The infrastructure team was asked for more communication channels (discourse, discord, etc.), but neither the team nor the council has admin system permissions to do that. It may be managed by the foundation because it ultimately pays for them. Usually, the person who set it up is still doing admin work for that. If we spend time on defining roles and responsibilities, it will be time well spent.
- Chris: I’d love the project council to help with this. Initially, I envisioned the community area team that would take over moderation. We have a code of conduct committee, which is not part of the board though people were pulled into it by the board. The committee is resolving most issues, but some get escalated to the board when disciplinary action is needed like banning someone from events or disallowing them to contribute. The committee makes a recommendation and the foundation ratifies it so the legal responsibility lies with the foundation. This is intentional so the individual contributors or contributing corporations are not liable. We need the community to select moderators and code of conduct members, but the legal aspect is better off with the foundation.
- Petr: we currently have people who are admins but don’t necessarily know how to use the tools, they are just helping at the best of their capability. We may have people in the community who may be better suited to do this.

---

- Alex: I nominate Aaron as a chair and myself as secretary based on speaking and writing time.
- Aaron: I accept the nomination.
- Petr: I support the nominations
- Nikita: I support the nominations.

---

- Alex: MLIR area team has been working on nominating maintainers for the project. We don’t feel like one lead maintainer is reasonable given the pace of change, so we want to have four. The policy allows this, but I wanted to run this with the council.
- Aaron: No problem for me. Originally, we had a single lead maintainer policy to avoid maintainers disagreeing. We relaxed it several years ago and there were no problems. It also makes sense organizationally, e.g., if the lead maintainer needs to be absent for an extended period of time.
- Petr: It’s a good point about handling absence and workload.
- Nikita: I don’t have objections to that either.

---

- Alex: MLIR has gotten its first AI-written RFC, so I wanted to flag that as something to discuss and find a policy, in particular with respect to copyright / licensing. We may need foundation help on this from the legal perspective.
- Nikita: the developer policy has a paragraph about that: [https://llvm.org/docs/DeveloperPolicy.html\#ai-generated-contributions](https://llvm.org/docs/DeveloperPolicy.html#ai-generated-contributions). We accept such contributions but the responsibility lies with the contributor to ensure the code can be used under the appropriate license.
- Chris: We have discussed this at board meetings. The current policy is a reflection of a fact that we realistically cannot tell, at least for small contributions, whether or not it was AI-generated, and it is unreasonable to expect the reviewers or maintainers to carry the burden of verifying. Please send an email to the board if you want to discuss more\!
- Aaron: The only reasonable policy we can currently have is to disallow any AI contribution entirely.
- Petr: There is a lot of push on using more and more AI assistance in producing code, especially in large companies that have their own models. But it is unclear whether the code produced that way is compatible with licenses.
- Discussion to be picked up next time.

# Agenda for May 06, 2025

Meeting link: [https://meet.google.com/eva-vywf-fve](https://meet.google.com/eva-vywf-fve)

Action Items from Last Meeting

* Aaron: reach out to Anton/Tom/Tanya to set up a Group on Discourse and a Team on GitHub for the area teams and for the project council
  * Started but not completed due to EuroLLVM, will follow-up
* Petr: put together a PR as a stake-in-the-ground for getting governance documented more centrally
  * Started but still needs some additional work, hope to be done soon

Agenda

* Who is the project council chair?
* Who is the project council secretary?
* Who is the project council’s liaison to the LLVM Foundation?
* Any RFCs we think we should look at?
* Schedule next meeting
* Alex: clangIR may want to be an area

# Minutes

* Aaron: we need to pick officer positions at some point, chair secretary and liaison
* Alex: talked at EuroLLVM with Foundation board members about project council and maybe we should pull in Chris B and Reid K to help explain the intent behind the liaison with the LLVM Foundation, who should send whom to where.
* Aaron: reached out to Anton, we currently have Discord groups, will ping again regarding Discourse and GitHub.
* Petr: we are sticking with 3 area team members for the infrastructure area team, do we need to help other teams with growing?
* Alex: MLIR team has four, but some problems with split votes are possible (but haven’t been a problem so far)
* Petr: primary concern for us is ensuring we have consensus within the community, rather than a unilateral decision-making process.
* Petr: hot topic that comes up frequently is operational maturity within LLVM. Lots of people coming in to infrastructure area team meetings; a lot of push for improvements (especially regarding code reviews, pull requests and direct push, etc). Infra team is aligned on where to go in the long run regarding direct pushes, trying to get to every change requires a code review. But everyone on board in the infra team does not necessarily mean everyone in the community agrees. Can we just make that change unilaterally? I don’t think so. So what is the process?
* Alex: we as the project council can send an RFC and see what the response is. We’re not required to have unanimous consent, just [rough consensus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rough_consensus), according to the governance documents we have currently.
* Petr: there’s a lot of strong opinions in the community, it would be helpful to better understand people’s reasons why they’re opposed to the changes. Would it be possible to hear from all area teams whether their team would be in favor? And if not, what the concrete concerns are?
* Alex: not mutually exclusive processes; we could go to area teams first, but there are parts of the project not covered by an area team. Sometimes, restating the various options/opinions in a thread can help reduce the amount of contention.
* Aaron: invite people with the strongest opinions to a meeting so they can discuss. Oftentimes, we talk past each other in writing, which is not necessarily a problem with a call. Find a time that works for people with the strongest opinion
* Petr: make sure it doesn’t turn into a shouting match.
* Aaron: I can do a reasonable job in keeping people on topic. We can remind people the meeting is governed by the LLVM Code of Conduct.
* Alex: people tend to have a negative bias from reading material rather than oral communication, so holding a meeting may end up having less heat just because of the venue.
* Aaron: we don’t have an RFC yet, so may not be actionable.
* Petr: we have discussed this in the team: should we just start it or collect more data first? We are specifically thinking about post-commit reviews. Maybe just requiring PRs first without mandatory review, this makes it easier to find even post-commit reviews. There are some people that still had concerns about the friction of creating a PR. Can we make it as easy as pushing?
* Aaron: data gathering is not necessarily a precondition for an RFC. It’s up to the Infrastructure group to decide how much data they need. It might help getting the numbers of how many commits are going to be affected.
* Petr: it’s 20-40% changes that are going in.
* Alex and Arron: that’s surprising.
* Petr: that’s why security people at Google are losing sleep.
* Aaron: is this specific to a directory?
* Petr: looks more like certain contributors, but it isn’t uniformly distributed. There are also special cases like bazel changes or bot commits. E.g., most changes into lld are not reviewed. When we brought it up with maintainers, the answer was that there were no relevant reviewers except the author. And there’s no area team for lld.
* Aaron: we perennially have a problem of not enough reviewers.
* Petr: this often comes up as a concern – people struggle with the review load. Not doing a review is not a solution\!
* Aaron: maybe not having reviews may be indicative of the community not caring enough. The problem is likely the high rate of incoming change.
* Alex: MLIR folks are looking to be more aggressive with removing unmaintained code. This helps get new maintainers from downstreams who rely on that functionality.
* Petr: Aaron, have you considered being more proactive about removing unused functionality?
* Aaron: I’ve been pushing for removing stuff, and we were occasionally successful. E.g., ARC migration code. Flags are harder because people may be using them in private codebases, and we don’t have any telemetry.
* Petr: it would be great to have telemetry, but probably contentious.
* Petr: we may talk about it in the infrastructure group. For example, having a special build that has telemetry and we kindly ask people to use it.
* Aaron: other open-source projects did it with good explanation and a clear opting out. We may end up just having a cmake flag.
* Petr: a subteam at Google is working on a tool called [Cobalt](https://fuchsia.googlesource.com/cobalt/) for differential privacy telemetry.
* Aaron: there are also technical problems with clang, like the sheer amount of files that may be compiled. It is also a communication exercise to users.
* Aaron: re RFC, does the Infra team drive that or the Project Council?
* Petr: I’m okay with the Infra team driving this. We want to both outline the long-term vision but make clear it may take years. Identify milestones and describe their value. The first is requiring PRs for all the changes going in. What is the best way of collecting feedback? We will come to the project Council when we decide to take action. I don’t expect that we will get everybody on board.
* Aaron: we will step in to calm people and ensure a productive discussion.

---

* Aaron: someone asking if PSTL can be deleted?
* Petr: there are other directories like that, not being actively used, like libc/aor that was dropped by ARM. Nobody is willing to delete it. Re PSTL, we can check in the next C++ monthly.
* Aaron: I checked with Intel and they need it. They think libstdc++ may be vendoring it, and libc++ may be upset if that gets removed.
* Aaron: we need a better communication mechanism with our downstreams.
* Petr: the way it works for C++ is to have a dedicated team (vendors) that interested parties can join, and that group gets added to breaking changes. We also have clang-vendors, we may do that for all major groups / area.
* Aaron: we can @-mention the group, but not add it as a reviewer.

---

* Petr: we don’t have a good mechanism to conclude an RFCs. Maybe start using PRs.
* Aaron: we need community buy-in, but can float that as an idea. On clang side, I’m editing the RFC to add a link to the comment saying consensus was found or not. Not everybody has the ability to do that.
* Alex: we are trying to have the area team comment on the state and the next steps.
* Aaron: we also do that, probably the most important part.

---

* Aaron: no strong opinion for or against a CIR team.
* Petr: looking through the governance documents, the responsibility of the area team is nominating maintainers and reviewing RFCs. Are there enough RFCs?
* Nikita: do they have any decisions they need to make on the CIR team?
* Aaron: we are waiting for them to contribute enough stuff to Clang, which they are close to, before giving them maintainership of the project.
* Alex: so it may be a bit premature for a full area team, but we want to ensure discoverability of the working group.
* Nikita: adding them as maintainers is likely a good step for that.

Action Items

* Aaron will invite Chris B to the next project council meeting
* ~~Alex will send a poll for the next meeting and for a potential recurrent time slot.~~


# Agenda for Apr 03, 2025

Meeting link: [https://meet.google.com/pzs-sngz-mpk](https://meet.google.com/pzs-sngz-mpk)

Action Items from Last Meeting

* None

Agenda

* Quick hellos/introductions
* How do we want to add things to our agenda?
  * How to track RFCs? GitHub projects/issues?
* How do we want to handle RFCs that have no area team coverage?
* What amount of time do we want to spend each month on meetings?
* How to communicate back with the community
  * What kind of improved documentation is needed for area teams?
* When's our next meeting?

Minutes

* Aaron: Clang area team is largely about avoiding making decisions but instead getting the right people into meetings to discuss concerns to the point where the next steps are obvious.
* Alex: MLIR largely works the same way, have had good success splitting topics up into other groups. Once there’s no way to reach consensus, then we can discuss how to handle it, but hopefully that never comes up.
* Petr: one issue we’ve had so far is getting people to show up to the meeting. In terms of doing the work, the folks on the Google side have been attending regularly. So far it hasn’t been an issue. We have multiple infrastructures (buildbot, green dragon, GitHub action runners, self-hosted runners); everything has different admins, different owners. One contention can be around capacity – if we want to do that, \*how\* does it work? Can we just give someone money? We don’t have the answers. But it’s not clear if the infra team is the one to solve that (might not even be in the mandate)
* Aaron: how are we tracking RFCs across area teams?
* Petr: currently using a Google Doc for meetings, checking Discourse and GitHub and getting them on an agenda. It’s a bit manual, but is working. So far meeting minutes are kept in the doc, but should we be posting them elsewhere?
* Aaron: we also use Google Doc for meeting minutes and it lets us control visibility. But Clang gets a lot of RFCs and we cannot realistically process all of them. We are also considering Github projects for keeping track of RFCs. We might not need the same thing for the Project council as it is likely getting less RFCs worth of its attention.
* Alex: MLIR only gets 1-2 a week and have a lot of offline discussion, so not as many as on the Clang side. Bigger problem are that originally submitter for the RFC just sort of disappear. We haven’t figure out how to address the problem where people show up, folks have feedback, and the authors don’t respond. GitHub projects sound reasonable. It would be helpful to collect information about how many abandoned RFC exist. We have a fair amount of RFCs from first-time contributors who don’t always have their expectations set appropriately.
* Aaron: we really need to document things better, in particular about processes. Eventually, we’d like to get to a point where we can tell people “you’ll get feedback on the RFC within N weeks”.
* Petr: we can look at Carbon and their experience. They do everything on Github via PRs. There are no additional tools available on Discourse like labels. There may be pushback.
* Aaron: my personal opinion is that we should switch to a more formal process, but it is going to be a hard sell in this community. There’s a tension between being open and welcoming community and processes for production quality software. Someone will have to write an RFCs. Do we want RFCs from the Council as a whole.
* Petr: having consensus ahead is helpful.
* Alex: a more formal process can be offset by also clarifying what we think needs and RFC and what can just be a regular PR that doesn’t require as much process. It’s not currently clear. It does add some friction, but makes it clear we don’t always need that friction which hopefully addresses some community push back. MLIR found that having multiple coauthors on a more contentious RFC helps to mitigate community concerns as well.
* Aaron: everything is currently documented for LLVM, but it is unclear whether it applies to the whole community. THe status quo is that not everyone is following the rest of that, e.g., coding standards. E.g. libc++ cannot follow LLVM coding standards because STL. We need to document how and when projects diverge from common policies.
* Petr: we are overdue for lifting some of the original LLVM policy decisions. We haven’t fully taken advantage of the Github monorepo, except for some small parts shared by projects. We can define guidelines at the top level and let subprojects opt out of certain things or redefine them.
* Aaron: this is consistent with the feedback I have from folks. In particular, where to put this documentation: does this belong to the website? Repository?
* Petr: maybe nobody wanted to take the initiative.
* Aaron: decision-making around community-wide policy changes is a burn-out factor. With the Project Council, we may have more authority and a draw for people to contribute meaningful.
* Petr: for a lot of large-scale RFCs, a majority would remain silent likely implying agreement, but a vocal minority could make the RFC die from a lot of arguing. Maybe having a Project Council member step in and publicly support could make people show their support.
* Aaron: we don’t want to get the community post RFCs yet, this requires buy-in. But for ourselves, we can start using Github to track the status of RFCs. Not for any RFCs, but for those where we think we need to get involved or somebody explicitly asked for it.
* Alex: what are the rules of engagement, how do people reach out to us?
* Aaron: e.g., there’s an explicit question if an RFC is accepted or not without somebody clearly saying it is, people can ping us directly on Discourse. Another option is area team escalating. And finally for projects that don’t have an area team. Initially, we may want to be more proactive and asking if people need help. In clang, if we see an RFC needing attention, we leave a comment saying the area team will schedule a meeting to discuss it.
* Discourse has groups: [https://discourse.llvm.org/g](https://discourse.llvm.org/g) that can be @-mentioned.
* Aaron: how frequently do we want to meet and for how long?
* Alex: should be flexible, we don’t know how much work we have
* Aaron: one Clang side, we sometimes need several meetings per topic.
* Petr: aim for one meeting a month for right now, see where to go from there
* Aaron: in Clang area team, we have a public meeting on a specific RFC and then a private meeting of the area team discussing next steps and administrative discussions.
* Alex: we do something similar but not necessarily via a meeting (can use Discord DMs, group chat, etc). Depends a bit on the topic though. Maybe have an hour schedule, 45 minutes of community discussion and then kick folks out for the last 15 minutes of closed discussion.
* Petr: infrastructure has all been public, but we’ll use a private channel on discord for ad hoc (or one-off meetings). Haven’t needed to take things private currently. Don’t have enough data to know what the “right” approach is.
* Nikita: how do people reach out to the project council?
* Aaron: we will have a Discourse group.
* Nikita: and if it is on PRs?
* Aaron: we can also have a Github group.
* Petr: should we update the docs for governance specifically? Maybe under our existing documentation directory? The current governance stuff is currently a .md file in the www repo, it would be nice to update to put in a more central location.
* Room: this is a great idea\!
* Aaron: if it is on the website, we likely want it in one place with the Project Council and all Area teams.
* Petr: it would be helpful to have on the website.
* Aaron: similar to how the LLVM Foundation puts their meetings on the website.
* Petr: should we have `llvm-project/docs` instead of `llvm-project/llvm/docs`? Otherwise it may be confusing. It goes back to a discussion from the above.
* Aaron: initially, let’s stick to what is most convenient. Ultimately, I’d like to see a reorganization of all this stuff in the repo. It would be nice to have a central location for all (sub-)community discussions.
* Petr: we can also put it into `llvm-www`.
* Nikita: It’s annoying because one has to write HTML.
* Petr: let’s put it in the LLVM docs for simplicity and availability.

Decisions Reached

* Will add a new Project for the project council, will add one issue per RFC the project council takes
* Will need to document this eventually, but initial steps to get things on our plate is either tag the group in Discourse or we’ll grab it manually by leaving a comment
* Will have meetings in open, if private discussion is needed, that will be handled ad hoc.

Action Items

- [ ] Aaron: reach out to Anton/Tom/Tanya to set up a Group on Discourse and a Team on GitHub for the area teams and for the project council
- [ ] Petr: put together a PR as a stake-in-the-ground for getting governance documented more centrally
- [x] ~~Alex: set up a poll to determine when our next meeting is~~

